Starc to Sharma, 1 run, 142kph, good length, hint of swing in to off, runs off the edge along the ground to third man
Starc to Dhawan, no run, 146kph, good length outside off, he tried to launch this with a cross bat, chops it off the bottom edge into the pitch
Starc to Dhawan, 1 run, 146kph, back of a length just outside, he waits and runs it off the open blade to third man
Starc to Sharma, 1 run, 146kph, inswinging yorker, he jams the bat down and squeezes it behind square, just got the bat down in time!
Starc to Dhawan, no run, 142kph, bouncer, this flies very high, Dhawan sways under, it's not called wide
Starc to Dhawan, no run, 145kph, good length angled into middle, he works this with the angle to midwicket
Coulter-Nile to Sharma, FOUR runs, angled down leg, he picks this up and flicks it up and over short fine! Great shot
Coulter-Nile to Sharma, 1 run, full outswinger outside off, pitching on the popping crease, he slices it through the gully
Coulter-Nile to Dhawan, no run, 138kph, good length into leg stump, cramping him, he works to square midwicket
Coulter-Nile to Dhawan, no run, 125kph slower ball, good length on middle, he defends on the front foot to cover-point
Coulter-Nile to Dhawan, no run, good length outside off, he drags it off the bottom half of the bat to midwicket
Coulter-Nile to Dhawan, FOUR runs, steps back and across early and pulls behind square! Great batting, he moved early, created the shorter length and pulled it fine of the man at deep square
Starc to Sharma, 1 run, good length on off, he defends with soft hands close into the off side, and an easy one is run. Great batting
Starc to Dhawan, 1 wide, 144kph, swinging wide of off, he flashes and misses but it's called wide by Paul Wilson
Starc to Dhawan, 2 runs, full into off, he drives inside out wide of mid off, Tye goes with the one hand and misfields, he allows a couple
Starc to Dhawan, no run, 145kph, back of a length into middle, he turns it with the angle to midwicket
Starc to Dhawan, no run, 145kph, tailing into the pads, full, he misses out trying to whip it away, it was going way down leg so no shout for LBW
Starc to Dhawan, no run, 139kph bouncer, he tries to pull hard but it comes off a touch slower than he expected
Starc to Dhawan, FOUR runs, cracking off drive! This was a half-volley and he leaned into the drive and placed it perfectly past mid off
Coulter-Nile to Sharma, 1 wide, angled down the leg side and rightly called wide
Coulter-Nile to Sharma, SIX runs, short into the hip and he pulls with the angle up and over fine leg into the crowd! What a shot. Too easy for Sharma
Coulter-Nile to Sharma, 1 run, 137kph, good length, fourth stump, he defends with soft hands running into the gully
Coulter-Nile to Dhawan, no run, 126kph, good length, middle and leg, he defends on the front foot
Coulter-Nile to Dhawan, 2 runs, 116kph, slower ball bouncer, he waits and pulls to deep square leg
Coulter-Nile to Dhawan, SIX runs, slower ball, back of a length, he hammers a slog sweep over deep midwicket into the crowd again! Wow!
Coulter-Nile to Dhawan, FOUR runs, slower ball again and driven on the up straight of cover! Superb batting from Shikhar Dhawan. He has clobbered this on the rise into the gap
Stoinis to Sharma, no run, 128kph, good length into leg stump, he turns neatly off the front foot to midwicket
Stoinis to Sharma, SIX runs, crunch! A front foot pull over long on! Just a fraction short at 126kph, Rohit read it and flat batted this over long on and it goes all the way
Stoinis to Sharma, 1 run, 127kph, good length on off, he turns with soft hands to square leg for a single
Stoinis to Dhawan, 1 wide, slower ball full toss that slipped out way wide. It didn't land on the pitch
Stoinis to Dhawan, SIX runs, launched over square leg way back into the stands! My goodness! Again he drops short on the hip and he massacres this pull shot and it goes way, way, way back into the crowd!
Stoinis to Dhawan, FOUR runs, 102kph slower ball, good length, he sits waits and slaps it back over the bowler's head, three bounces over the rope!
Stoinis to Dhawan, FOUR runs, pulled over mid on and it lands just short of the rope! Wow! This was 129kph, short and way wide, he stands up and hammers a pull flat and straight over mid on. It was only metres short of another six!
Starc to Sharma, 1 run, 129kph, good length slower ball on off, he defends with soft hands into the off side for a simple one

Starc to Dhawan, FOUR runs, driven through cover! 128kph slower ball, half-volley, he picks it, waits and places this inside out past cover and it flies to the rope. What batting this is
Starc to Dhawan, OUT, full and straight, 145kph, into middle, did it hit pad before bat? Umpire says not out to the shout. Australia review. It was tailing in, definitely hit pad first. Ball tracking says it's hitting leg stump! Out LBW!. Great review from Finch. Great work from Starc
Starc to Kohli, no run, full angled across, he is cautious, playing a text book defensive push to cover

Starc to Kohli, no run, shorter length, on middle and leg, he jumps back in defence into cover
Starc to Kohli, no run, 146kph, good length on leg, he works it to midwicket
Zampa to Sharma, no run, tossed up leg break, very full, driven back to the bowler
Zampa to Sharma, no run, shorter and wider, it skids on, he tries to late cut but misses
Zampa to Sharma, no run, fired through, angled down leg, he tried to pull and slips over as it hits the pad. There's an appeal but it's not out
Zampa to Sharma, no run, flipper, fired into off, he defends on the front foot
Zampa to Sharma, OUT, bowled him! This was fired in at 91kph, good length, Sharma played back and tried to work against the line through square leg, it skidded on off the surface, hurried him, inside edge onto pad and then onto the stumps!
Zampa to Rahul, no run, tossed up outside off, he drives straight to cover
Coulter-Nile to Kohli, 2 runs, 135kph, good length, he walks a pace down to the line and whips this sumptuously wide of mid on for two. What a way to get off the mark!
Coulter-Nile to Kohli, 1 run, 132kph, short ball, he's pulling but gets it off the toes of the bat and rolls it around to deep fine leg
Coulter-Nile to Rahul, no run, 136kph, good length, fourth stump line, checks a drive to cover
Coulter-Nile to Rahul, SIX runs, pulled over deep square! 132kph, back of a length, he picked up the length so quick, pulled it off the bottom of the bat but he hit it hard enough to sail high over the man in the deep at square leg!
Coulter-Nile to Rahul, 1 run, pushed on the front foot slowly to mid off and they run well to pinch one
Coulter-Nile to Kohli, 1 run, 137kph, fuller length, he drives nicely to deep cover-point
Maxwell to Kohli, no run, 85kph, around the wicket, drifting to middle, he defends on the front foot
Maxwell to Kohli, 1 run, shorter length on leg, he whips this nicely to deep square leg
Maxwell to Rahul, no run, he pushes this through to off, he's back and defending
Maxwell to Rahul, 1 run, shorter on leg, he's back and working through square leg to the sweeper
Maxwell to Kohli, no run, flighted slower and fuller, he drives straight to cover
Maxwell to Kohli, 1 run, 95kph, good length on off, he's back and pushing this to midwicket
Zampa to Kohli, 2 runs, drifting outside leg, on the front foot he works this through square leg and Kohli immediately calls two, great running. He is so good at that
Zampa to Kohli, 1 run, flighted outside off, a slog sweep flat along the ground to deep long on
Zampa to Rahul, 2 wides, fired full down leg, Carey can't glove the half-volley, they get another run on top
Zampa to Kohli, 1 run, flatter outside off, deft late cut to fine short third man
Zampa to Rahul, no run, wrong un, nicely pitched turning into off, he defends into the off side
Zampa to Kohli, FOUR runs, short and wide and Kohli pounces, cuts this hard and places past point! Great stroke from Kohli
Zampa to Rahul, 1 run, shorter length on off, 92kph, he's back and pushing it to long on
Maxwell to Rahul, 1 run, ticks it past the right of Maxwell, even with him diving full-length to his right
Maxwell to Rahul, no run, tosses it up on off stump, Rahul knocks it back at the bowler, unable to find the single he wants
Maxwell to Rahul, no run, pushes it through on middle and leg, Rahul works it to the right of the bowler
Maxwell to Rahul, no run, goes for the reverse sweep, but with Maxwell pulling his length back, he's unable to make any contact
Maxwell to Kohli, 1 run, leans forward as he get to the pitch of the offbreak on leg stump and works it through midwicket
Maxwell to Rahul, 1 run, shuffles across with Maxwell going across him from round the wicket, and the good length ball on off stump is nudged through midwicket
Zampa to Rahul, 1 run, thinks about coming down the pitch but Zampa's flat trajectory and his excellent line around off stump disallows Rahul any access to his power game. Single through cover off an ugly slice
Zampa to Kohli, 3 runs, gorgeous late cut but even still, it should only have been a single. Lynn at short third man mistimes his dive and gives away a couple more
Zampa to Kohli, 2 runs, stays back in his crease against the googly, picking the variation, waiting for it to turn into him, and them flicks it sweetly to deep midwicket
Zampa to Rahul, 1 run, whips it through midwicket
Zampa to Rahul, no run, comes down the pitch but Zampa gets the ball to dip in time and Rahul can only push it down the pitch
Zampa to Rahul, no run, premeditates a reverse sweep and that allows the bowler to change his line, bowling onto leg stump to deny hitting room.

Maxwell to Rahul, OUT, caught at long-off! He's been trying to dominate the spinners, trying to put them off their lengths by charging at them, or reverse sweeping them. But it never looked like coming off. And this time, he's even found the fielder. A trip down the pitch and a desperate slash is taken very very easily by Coulter-Nile
Maxwell to Kohli, 1 run, shortish and outside off, he stands tall and pulls it through midwicket
Maxwell to Kohli, 2 runs, turns the length ball on middle through square leg
Maxwell to Kohli, 2 runs, mis-hits it over point! Kohli is trying to make room, trying to one-up Maxwell who has been trying to deny that. The ball drifts away from him just enough to make him lose his shape
Maxwell to Rahul, 1 run, steps out to drive a length ball going across him to long-off
Maxwell to Rahul, no run, shortish and outside off, from round the wicket, Rahul punches to cover



Tye to Karthik, 1 run, shortsh on middle and leg, they secure a single through midwicket
Tye to Karthik, no run, back of a length on off stump, Karhik keeps it out
Tye to Karthik, no run,
Tye to Karthik, no run, lbw appeal but the fuller delivery is slanted into the pads and would have slipped down past the stumps as DK misses the flick
Tye to Karthik, no run, good length on off stump, blocks to cover and runs
Tye to Pant, OUT, caught behind! This is poor. He needs pace to play a shot like this - the pull to the fine leg boundary - but that's the one thing Tye denies. The slower bouncer outside leg stump sneaks up on Pant, rising up at him, lobbing up off his glove and settling in Carey's waiting hands. Australia, without anyone noticing, are getting on a bit of a roll
Zampa to Karthik, no run, steps out but he ends up too close to the ball, yorking himself as he tries to drive to cover
Zampa to Kohli, 1 run, short and outside off, Kohli pulls it to long-on
Zampa to Kohli, no run, goes wide of the crease to ensure the ball slants into Kohli, dipping at the last second to beat Kohli on the flick
Zampa to Karthik, 1 run, loops it up on middle, Karthik turns it to deep midwicket
Graham MacDonal: "This looks like one of those king kohli saves the day matches in a thriller "
Zampa to Kohli, 1 run, picks the googly as he stays back and flicks the quicker delivery through midwicket
Zampa to Karthik, 1 run, works it away straight of midwicket
Tye to Karthik, no run, opens the face against a length ball on off stump, but he finds point
Tye to Kohli, 1 run, back of a length and outside off, Kohli taps it behind point
Tye to Kohli, no run, slower ball, and that lack of pace is useful in deceiving Kohli, as he plays the flick and misses
Tye to Kohli, SIX runs, times it perfectly - both the step down the pitch and the bat swing that comes down and goes straight through the line of the ball. Outstanding shot over long-off
Tye to Kohli, FOUR runs, lashes it over point. Excellent work from Kohli, getting on top of the ball, waiting on it so he can get the gap behind point
Tye to Kohli, no run, comes down the pitch, only to inside edge the back of a length ball that denies him the room he wants
Tye to Kohli, 1 wide, Kohli yells at himself after he fails to make contact with a length ball wandering away down leg
Maxwell to Karthik, 2 runs, goes for the reverse scoop, and though he only makes contact with the glove, it's enough to get a couple right over the keeper's head
Maxwell to Karthik, 2 runs, run-out chance at the non-strikers. Karthik nudges it to the right of Maxwell and thinks there's a straightforward single there. But Maxwell hares across, grabs it with his right hand, takes aim, but misses the target
Maxwell to Kohli, 1 run, works it through midwicket, along the ground this time
Maxwell to Kohli, SIX runs, launches it over deep midwicket! Spectacular hit, coming down the track, and even though he isn't to the pitch of the ball, he holds his balance and that's where he gets all that power from
Maxwell to Karthik, 1 run, sweeps the loopy delivery on off stump away to backward square leg on the boundary
Maxwell to Kohli, 1 run, full on middle, Kohli tucks it through midwicket
Tye to Karthik, no run, appeal for a catch off the boot. But the umpire Abood says no. Decent ball though, tailing in late, cramping Kathik who was charging down the pitch again
Tye to Karthik, SIX runs, so much height on it! And it's on the second tier. Mistake from the bowler, going short, the ball sitting up to be pulled to oblivion
Tye to Kohli, 1 run, mis-hit behind square leg, but it brings up his fifty. The slower short ball has him playing a touch too early; reaching in front of him as he goes for the pull
Tye to Karthik, 1 run, comes down the pitch and drives the full delivery tailing into him to mid-off
Tye to Kohli, 1 run, gets up with the short ball outside off and swats it to deep point
Tye to Kohli, 2 runs, taps it into the vacant midwicket region, always looking for two, and getting it in the end
Starc to Karthik, 2 runs, walks across outside off and ends up too far away from the short ball outside leg. In the end, he just about gets to it with a pull through square leg
Starc to Kohli, 1 run, pulls the short ball from outside off to deep square leg
Starc to Karthik, 1 run, whip of the wrists sending the fuller delivery looking for the middle stump away through square leg
Starc to Karthik, FOUR runs, spears it to the point boundary! It's not quite the yorker Starc is looking for outside off. But it is exactly what DK is ready for. Stays balanced at the crease. And more importantly, low, as well and opens the face of the bat. Lovely stuff
Starc to Kohli, 1 leg bye, 141 kph, tries to whip a back of a length ball angled into his thighs, but he's into the shot a tiny bit early and the ball lobs off his thigh
Starc to Kohli, 2 runs, hustles it away towards the deep midwicket boundary as Starc bowls a full one on off stump from round the wicket

Tye to Kohli, FOUR runs, swings it out to the vacant areas around midwicket and celebrates with arms aloft. India level the series
Tye to Kohli, FOUR runs, thumps it down the ground. It's a half-volley, in Kohli's swinging arc, and he hammers it away. He's pumped. He's punching the air. He's sensing the series going level
Tye to Kohli, no run, is that not a wide, asks Kohli, after he doesn't make contact with another short, slower ball outside off
Tye to Kohli, no run, beats him with a slower ball that Kohli swings across the line and misses completely
Kumar to Finch, 1 leg bye, good length, nipping back, hits him on the pad, big appeal, not out, outside the line, it runs to a vacant gully and they run a leg bye
Kumar to Short, 1 run, good length, middle and leg, tucked through square leg to the sweeper
Kumar to Short, FOUR runs, crunched on the up through extra cover! Good length angling across but well wide and he throws the hands through this and picks the gap at extra cover. it races away
Kumar to Finch, 1 run, good length outside off, mistimed drive runs slowly to mid off and they run an easy one as mid off is deep on the circle
Kumar to Finch, no run, sharp inswinger, good length, hits the pad, big appeal from Pant, but not much interest elsewhere, not out, going way down
Kumar to Short, 1 run, good length on middle, no swing, turns this nicely through forward square, the man in the deep runs around, they think about two but it's not on
Ahmed to Finch, no run, short ball outside off, Finch tries to pull hard but is through the shot and gets a bottom edge that bounces to Pant
Ahmed to Finch, no run, 129kph, driven nicely on the up straight to cover, Finch walked down the track, Kohli fired at the striker's end and hit, there's a review for run out. Finch got his bat back easily
Ahmed to Finch, no run, good length, fourth stump line, punched to cover
Ahmed to Finch, 1 wide, swinging way down leg, Finch is frustrated his head falls over but it's a wide and he gets another ball
Ahmed to Finch, 2 runs, 127kph, good length outside off, he punches wide of mid off on the up, nicely timed, didn't overhit it, gets a couple
Ahmed to Finch, 1 wide, swinging a touch down the leg side, he misses the glance, definitely a wide
Ahmed to Finch, FOUR runs, 129kph, cracking pull shot! Fractionally too short and Finch pounces, he thumped this so hard through midwicket. It thumped into the rope
Ahmed to Finch, no run, 125kph, beaten, good length nipping across, he prods forward and it goes past the edge, but it bounced short of Pant
Kumar to Short, 1 run, short into the hip, he pulls nicely but straight to the man in the deep on the rope on the bounce
Kumar to Short, no run, 133kph, good length across him outside off, gets a thick edge that flies along the ground to short third man
Kumar to Short, no run, 120kph, shorter length on off, he punches off the back foot to cover and Kohli makes a rolling save
Kumar to Short, no run, shorter length, of off stump, he stands up and defends back to the bowler
Mid off goes back to long off, third man up
Kumar to Short, no run, half-volley outside off, driven with a check drive straight to cover
Kumar to Short, FOUR runs, smashed down the ground straight over the umpire's head! This was 129kph in the slot and he pounded this flat and hard back at the sightscreen
Bumrah to Short, 1 run, 139kph, very full, driven off the bottom of the bat and it rolls slowly to mid off and they run well
Bumrah to Finch, 1 run, 139kph, good length angling into off, he works with the angle square of midwicket
Bumrah to Finch, no run, 141kph, good length outside off, he drives on the up to cover
Bumrah to Short, 1 run, slower ball, good length on off, he defends towards point and they pinch one on Rahul
Bumrah to Short, no run, beaten trying to cut again. This was not as short and closer to off
Bumrah to Short, FOUR runs, short outside off, just enough width and he cuts beautifully past point! This wasn't that wide but he created the room and placed it perfectly
Ahmed to Finch, FOUR runs, driven magnificently wide of mid off! 117kph slower ball floated up outside off, he picked it, held his shape, and eased his hands through it, it was hit in the air but right in the gap between cover and mid off and flew to the rope
Ahmed to Short, 1 run, 134kph, short ball, chest high and he smashes a pull shot straight to the fielder on the rop at deep square
Ahmed to Finch, 1 run, good length outside off, tried to loft over the off side, gets a thick inside edge onto pad, and it rolls into the off side for one
Ahmed to Finch, 2 runs, 114kph slower ball, length, he swipes this cross bat high over midwicket, mis timed but it falls well safe and deep midwicket comes around
Ahmed to Finch, FOUR runs, 135kph, short ball, and he pounces and hammers a pull shot through square leg! He got up with the bounce and rolled the wrists. Cracking shot
Ahmed to Short, 1 leg bye, 133kph, short into the thigh, he tried to whip, it runs off thigh just away into the leg side and they take an extra
Bumrah to Short, FOUR runs, full toss and square driven past point! A rare mistake from Bumrah. This was a wide full toss and Short just had to place it past point and it flies to the fence
Bumrah to Short, no run, good length outside off, he drives on the up straight to cover
Bumrah to Finch, 1 run, 144kph, he defends a good length and pushes this to cover-point and they pinch a tight one, there is a shy from Krunal at the non-strikers but he was home
Bumrah to Short, 1 run, 123kph, on the hip, he plays the pull with the one knee up, picks out the man at short fine but he misfields and allows a single
Bumrah to Finch, 1 run, angled down leg and he tucks this with the angle down to fine leg
Bumrah to Short, 1 run, 116kph, slower ball, bunted towards mid on
Kuldeep Yadav to Short, no run, shorter, spinner way wide of off, he reaches to cut but misses, not called a wide, it was tight
Kuldeep Yadav to Short, 2 runs, wrong un, short outside off, he's back and crunching a cut shot, and Rahul misfields on the circle, they get two to the man in the deep
Kuldeep Yadav to Short, no run, slower, good length, he's down and pushing back to the bowler
Slip is in for both the right and left hander
Kuldeep Yadav to Short, no run, tossed up, 79kph, outside off, mistimes a drive to cover
Kuldeep Yadav to Finch, 1 run, floated up, leg break, he skips down to the pinch and whips with the turn to deep midwicket
Kuldeep Yadav to Finch, no run, tries to sweep hit on the pad, huge appeal, not out. It was outside the line, not much turn
Pandya to Finch, FOUR runs, backs away, it's darted into leg, but short enough, he cuts past point and it beats the man at deep cover running around!
Pandya to Short, 1 run, shorter length, he pulls hard to deep midwicket
Pandya to Short, FOUR runs, shorter and pushed through outside off, cut hard to backward point and Bumrah misfields and it runs away for four! He should've stopped that. It just spun away from his hands
Pandya to Finch, 1 run, shorter on middle and leg, 96kph, he's back and tucking this through square leg
Pandya to Short, 1 run, shorter on middle, he's back and tucking this through midwicket
Pandya to Finch, 1 run, dropped at long on! Toss up outside off, he launches this high and gets under it, it goes miles up, Rohit camps under it and drops it. He dropped with his hands below his waist
Kuldeep Yadav to Maxwell, no run, given out LBW! Maxwell reviews after a long discussion with Short. It pitches on middle, he tries to whip to leg, it beats the inside edge. Definitely no bat. Ball tracking says it pitched in line, and spinning down leg! Missing leg. Maxwell survives. Great review.
Kuldeep Yadav to Maxwell, FOUR runs, wrong un, he drives and times this so well past cover! What a shot. It beats the man at deep long off
Kuldeep Yadav to Maxwell, no run, shorter on middle and leg, he tries to give room but bunts it back to the bowler
Kuldeep Yadav to Maxwell, 1 wide, pitching outside leg, spinning way down leg for a wide
Maxwell in at No.3 instead of Lynn. No doubt to combat the spin.
Kuldeep Yadav to Finch, OUT, top edged sweep caught at short fine! Krunal hangs on to this simple chance! This was a leg break on leg stump, he tries to sweep, a bit of extra bounce catches the top edge, it balloons to short fine and straight to Krunal, no chance he could drop that
Kuldeep Yadav to Short, 1 bye, top spinner, he tried to cut close to off, misses and Pant doesn't glove it again, it rolls away
Kuldeep Yadav to Finch, 2 wides, this is spinning down leg, Pant can't glove it and they run another extra
Kuldeep Yadav to Short, 1 run, tossed up outside off, he square drives hard to deep cover-point
Pandya to Maxwell, no run, beaten this spins sharply past the edge as he drives
Pandya to Carey, 1 run, shorter length, he's back and punching to long off
Pandya to Maxwell, 1 run, tossed up outside off, he pushes off the front foot to cover
Pandya to Carey, 1 run, around the wicket, pitching on middle, he turns this with the spin to square leg
W
Pandya to McDermott, OUT, LBW! Given out sweeping! He's on a hat-trick! First ball sweep shot, this was tossed up outside off from around the wicket, pitches outside, he tries to sweep, it slides on and hits the back leg, and Gerard Abood says it hit in line with off!
Pandya to Short, OUT, LBW! Again a long discussion and Short reviews! He tried to sweep, Krunal from around the wicket, it pitched in line, no bat involved. Ball tracking says it was in line, hit in line and was hitting! They lose the review this time. That was plumb.
Kuldeep Yadav to Carey, 1 run, loads up a big old sweep, dragging a tossed up ball from way outside off away to deep square leg
Kuldeep Yadav to Maxwell, 1 run, hits to long off. Probably picks the googly
Kuldeep Yadav to Maxwell, no run, good length, spinning into him, Maxwell tries to pull, but it doesn't rise as much as he wants
Kuldeep Yadav to Maxwell, no run, seems like a top spinner, going through flat on off stump and not spinning a great deal. Maxwell goes back, perhaps wondering if he can cut it, but then has to block down the pitch
Kuldeep Yadav to Maxwell, no run, loops it up onto off stump, Maxwell drives to extra cover
Kuldeep Yadav to Carey, 1 run, a tad short, making him reach outside the off stump. Carey chops it in front of point
Ahmed to Maxwell, 1 run, shortish and outside off, dabs it in front of point
Ahmed to Maxwell, no run, goes for the pull, but here, Khaleel is able to sneak under the bat and through to the keeper
Ahmed to Maxwell, FOUR runs, top-edge! It can happen, with the left-armer's bouncer going across the right-hander, and him going hard at a ball rising above his shoulder. Not easy to get on top of it to muscle it through leg. But you do have every chance of pinging a boundary right behind you
Ahmed to Carey, 1 run, helps the back of a length delivery on off stump away to deep square leg. Short-arm pull done right
Ahmed to Carey, no run, looks for the clip through midwicket again, but he's underestimating Khaleel's bounce. In the end, the ball lobs off his thigh and into Khaleel's followthrough
Ahmed to Carey, no run, goes short, the ball rising up to his chest. Carey gets up on tiptoe and nudges it to short midwicket
KXIP go up to INR 5.2 crore for Dhawan. Mumbai drop out. Shikhar Dhawan sold to INR 5.2 core to KXIP. But wait! It's not done yet, Sunrisers have the right to match card and they have used it. Snatched back Dhawan from KXIP's pocket. DHAWAN sold to Sunrisers for INR 5.2 crore.
R Ashwin sold to KXIP at INR 7.6 crore (USD 1187500). Chennai don't have a right to match card for him. They cut Ashwin loose at INR 4 crore.
Kieron Pollard, sold to Delhi Daredevils for INR 5.4 crore. Will Mumbai use their right to match card? Yes they will! Mumbai Indians buy back Pollard at INR 5.4 crore via the right to match card.
BEN STOKES SOLD FOR INR 12.5 CRORE (USD 1.953 million) to RAJASTHAN ROYALS.
CSK aren't going to raise further. KXIP buy Faf du Plessis for INR 1.6 crore. But CSK use their right to match card and buy back Faf du Plessis at INR 1.6 crore.
Mumbai drop out of the bidding. KXIP have the highest bid for Rahane at INR 4 crore. Now they look at Royals, and see Royals use their right to match card for Rahane. Ajinkya Rahane sold to Royals for INR 4 crore (USD 625000).
Mitchell Starc sold to KKR for INR 9.4 crore.
Harbhajan Singh gets only one bid. Sold to CSK for INR 2 crore. He is 37 years old, after all.
Shakib sold to Sunrisers Hyderabad for INR 2 crore.
Sunrisers drop out. Delhi Daredevils buy Glenn Maxwell for INR 9 crore. Will KXIP use the right to match card? they decide not to. So Maxwell will play for Daredevils, under Ponting as coach.
KXIP drop out. Delhi Daredevils buy Gautam Gambhir at INR 2.8 crore. Are KKR cutting their captain loose? Yes they are! No right to match card used. Gambhir plays for Delhi.
Will CSK use their right to match card for Dwayne Bravo? Yes they will! CSK snatch Dwayne Bravo back from KXIP for INR 6.4 crore using the right to match card. CSK have no right to match cards left to use.
Kane Williamson sold to Sunrisers for INR 3 crore. They buy him back.
No bids for Joe Root, unsold!
Yuvraj Singh sold at base price INR 2 crore to KXIP, who have bought only their second player at this auction despite bidding for so many! Will Sunrisers use the right to match card? They are not.
KXIP look at the Daredevils table ... where they say no, we don't want Karun Nair. Karun Nair sold to KXIP at INR 5.6 crore.
KXIP have the bid for Rahul at INR 11 crore. No higher bids from anyone. Will RCB use the right to match card? No. Rahul sold to KXIP!
No bids! for an Indian batsman! Whoa. M Vijay unsold!
Sunrisers drop out of the bidding, the bid for David Miller is with Mumbai Indians at INR 3 crore. Will KXIP use their right to match card for Miller? Yes! KXIP buy back David Miller at INR 3 crore via the right to match card. He's their first overseas player.
KXIP raise again. Royals getting slower and slower. And they are out of the race for Finch. Finch sold to KXIP for INR 6.2 crore.
RCB buy Brendon McCullum for INR 3.6 crore. First buy for RCB today.
Delhi Daredevils buy Jason Roy at base price of INR 1.5 crore.
KKR make a INR 9.6 crore bid for Lynn, RCB drop out. Sold to KKR at INR 9.6 crore (USD 1500000). Lynn is a Knight Rider once again.
No bids for Hashim Amla! Unsold. He'll have a job to do at Jo'burg today
Manish Pandey sold to Sunrisers at INR 11 crore (USD 1.718 million). Equals Rahul as the most expensive Indian. Will KKR use the right to match card? Lots of discussions. A very expensive right to match card. They let him go. They have spent a lot of their purse already.
Chris Woakes, sold for INR 7.4 crore (more than a million dollars) to RCB.
KXIP drop out. Carlos Brathwaite sold to Sunrisers for INR 2 crore. Will Daredevils use their right to match card? They decide to let him go.
Delhi drop out. CSK have the bid for Watson at INR 4 crore. Will RCB use the right to match card for Watson? They just bought an allrounder in Chris Woakes. RCB decide not to. Shane Watson sold to CSK for INR 4 crore.
Kedar Jadhav sold to CSK at INR 7.8 crore. RCB have the right to match card. Vettori says No thanks. At 32, Jadhav is the youngest player bought by CSK today.
RCB make an INR 2.2 crore bid for Colin de Grandhomme. Sunrisers are out. SOLD AT INR 2.2 crore to RCB.
Yusuf Pathan sold to Sunrisers for INR 1.9 crore, after KKR decide not to use their right to match card.
Delhi bid INR 1.9 crore for Colin Munro. Royals drop out. Sold to the Daredevils!
Stuart Binny, sold to Royals at base price of INR 50 lakh. Unless RCB want him back? Many heads shaking at that table. RCB let him go.
Royals stop bidding . Marcus Stoinis sold to RCB for INR 6.2 crore. Unless KXIP want to use their right to match card. And they do! MARCUS STOINIS RETURNS TO KIXP AT INR 6.2 CRORE via the right to match card.
Moeen Ali sold for INR 1.7 crore to RCB. Joins his English team-mate Chris Woakes.
Will Delhi use their right to match card for Quinton de Kock? They refuse. Quinton de Kock sold to RCB for INR 2.8 crore.
Mumbai stop bidding, Sunrisers have made the highest bid for Saha. Will Kings XI use the right to match card? They say no. Wriddhiman Saha sold to Sunrisers for INR 5 crore.
No takes for the England wicketkeeper. Jonny Bairstow is unsold.
Royals out. KKR buy Dinesh Karthik for INR 7.4 crore. He is their first Indian player. They now have INR 32.6 crore to buy at least 13 more players. (Squad strength needs to be a minimum of 18).
Royals stop bidding finally! Its been a long slog for Robin Uthappa. Sold to Mumbai Indians for INR 6.4 crore. Will KKR use the right to match card? They say yes!!!! KKR buy Robin Uthappa for INR 6.4 crore. All their players are millionaires. They have only INR 26.2 crores for at least 12 players.
Sanju Samson sold to Royals for INR 8 crore. Unless Daredevils use the right to match card. They decide not to.
Ambati Rayudu sold to CSK for INR 2.2 crore.
Jos buttler sold to Royals at INR 4.4 crore. Mumbai Indians say no to the right to match option. Buttler to Royals.
Mumbai raise, INR 2.2 crore for Mustafizur Rahman. That will be the selling price unless Sunrisers use their right to match card. Sunrisers don't want him back. Mustafizur sold to Mumbai for INR 2.2 crore.
Mumbai take the bid up to INR 5.4 crore, at which point CSK drop out. And then they ask the auctioneer to wait. And then they say no again. Mumbai Indians buy Pat Cummins for INR 5.4 crore. Daredevils then say no to the right to match card option.
Umesh Yadav sold to RCB at INR 4.2 crore. KKR decline to use a right to match card for him, they thought a while before saying no.
Sunrisers make the highest bid for Mohammed Shami at INR 3 crore. But Delhi Daredevils use their right to match card to bring Shami back into their fold. Sold to Delhi for INR 3 crore.
CSK make the highest bid for Rabada, but Delhi swoop in to use their right to match card and buy Rabada for INR 4.2 crore. Delhi have exhausted their right to match cards.
RCB drop out. Will KKR use the right to match card? Yes they do. KKR take Chawla from CSK at INR 4.2 crore via the right to match card. 
Imran Tahir sold at base price INR 1 crore to CSK.
CSK buy Karn Sharma for INR 5 crore. Their 11th player for 30 years or older.
Will Sunrisers use their right to match card for Rashid Khan?! Yes they are! Look at that, such a battle for the spinner and Sunrisers have sat back and then decided they want to spend INR 9 crore for him. Sold!
RCB are out. Delhi have the bid for Amit Mishra. Sold for INR 4 crore!
Will RCB use the right to match card for Chahal? Yes they will, with no hesitation. Yuzvendra Chahal sold to RCB for INR 6 crore via the right to match card. Delhi lose out.
KKR are deliberating over the right to match card. they have only 22 crores left, and have only 7 players in the squad. they need to buy at least 11 players more. THEY DO USE THE RIGHT TO MATCH CARD and that's the last of them. RCB won't get Kuldeep Yadav. Sold to KKR for INR 5.8 crore.!
Suryakumar Yadav is going home. Sold to Mumbai Indians at INR 3.2 crore
Royals come back with a bid but are raised again by KKR, INR 1.8 crore. Shubman Gill is sold to KKR!
Ishank Jaggi sold to KKR at base price INR 20 lakh
Ricky Bhui sold to Sunrisers for INR 20 lakh.
RCB are out. Mayank Agarwal sold to KXIP for INR 1 crore.
RCB stop bidding at INR 3 crore. Rahul Tripathi sold to Royals for INR 3 .... nope, just when the auctioneer was ready to close this sale .... RCB come back in. Royals take it back up to INR 3.4. Adn RCB are out for good this time. Sold to Royals for INR 3.4 crore.
Manan Vohra sold to RCB for INR 1.1 crore. Kings XI are not using their right to match card.
Prithvi Shaw sold to Delhi Daredevils for INR 1.2 crore.
RCB have the bid for Krunal Pandya but Mumbai swoop in with the right to match card and pick up Krunal Pandya for INR 8.8 crore. The owner Aakash Ambani is thrilled!
Nitish Rana, sold for INR 3.4 crore to KKR.
Delhi have been beaten by the Royals. Anyone else want D'Arcy Short? Nope. Sold to Royals for INR 4 crore. 20x his base price. Maiden IPL season.
Sunrisers stop bidding at INR 7.2 crore, Royals have the bid. And royals have Jofra Archer for INR 7.2 crore.
Ishan Kishan sold to Mumbai Indians for INR 6.2 crore.
RCB enter the bidding, against Mumbai. The bid is with RCB at INR 85 lakh. Kulwant Khejroliya sold to RCB!
Sunrisers and KXIP going at it, the bid is over half a million dollars for Kaul. KXIP drop out. Sunrisers buy Siddarth Kaul at INR 3.8 crore.
T Natarajan, who raked it in at last year's auction. KXIP bought him last year. but he did not play Ranji Trophy this season because of injury. Base price INR 40 lakh. Sunrisers have made the bid. That's the only bid. Sold! But KXIP have the right to match card, but they don't want him this season.

KXIP drop out. Sunrisers come in at INR 85 lakh, against Mumbai. Sunrisers raise, and Mumbaidrop out after Sunrisers make a bid for IND 95 lakh. Sold to Sunrisers!
Aniket Chowdhary, base price INR 30 lakh, RCB bought him last year and they bid for him again. Its the only bid. Sold at base price!
Syed Khaleel Ahmed sold to Sunrisers for INR 3 crore.
Navdeep Saini, sold to RCB for INR 3 crore.
KKR raise the bid for Avesh Khan to INR 65 lakh, Delhi raise again. KKR are out. Avesh Khan sold to Delhi for INR 70 lakh. RCB are not interested in the right to match option.
KKR are out. Ankit Rajpoot sold to KXIP for INR 3 crore.
Rahul Chahar sold to Mumbai for INR 1.9 crore!
Shahbaz Nadeem sold to Delhi for INR 3.2 crore!
K Gowtham, sold for INR 6.2 crore to Rajasthan Royals! His base price was INR 20 lakh. Have a lovely Sunday!
M Ashwin, sold to RCB for INR 2.2 crore.
Saurabh Tiwary sold at INR 80 lakh to Mumbai Indians.
KXIP are out. RCB buy back Mandeep Singh at INR 1.4 crore.
Sunrisers are out. KXIP have the bid for Manoj Tiwary at INR 1 crore. Sold!
Washington Sundar sold to RCB for INR 3.2 crore.
Delhi are out. Pawan Negi sold to Mumbai. But RCB want him back via a right to match card. Pawan Negi will play for RCB at INR 1 crore.
Dan Christian, sold to Delhi at INR 1.5 crore.
Jayant Yadav, sold at base price INR 50 lakh to Delhi Daredevils!
Gurkeerat Singh, sold at INR 75 lakh to Delhi Daredevils. KXIP decide against using the right to match card. So Gurkeerat goes to Delhi.
Ben Cutting, sold to Mumbai Indians for INR 2.2 crore!
Sunrisers buy back Mohammad Nabi at INR 1 crore.
RCB make the highest bid for Dhawal Kulkarni. BUT Royals use the right to match card and buy back Kulkarni for INR 75 lakh. That is a steal for them.
CSK make the highest bid for Mohit Sharma. But Kings XI have the right to match card. Will they use it? Yes they will! Mohit Sharma goes to KINGS XI for INR 2.4 crore.
KKR can't, they are out. Sunrisers have the winning bid! INR 3 crore for Sandeep Sharma. Sold! They came in with one bid and won!
KKR finally get an Indian fast bowler. No other bids for Vinay Kumar. Sold to KKR for INR 1 crore. they have 6.6 crore left to buy at least 5 players.
KXIP are out. Mohammad Siraj, sold to RCB for INR 2.6 crore.
Nathan Coulter-Nile sold to RCB for INR 2.2 crore.
Jaydev Unadkat sold for INR 11.5 crore to Rajasthan Royals. Most expensive Indian player at this auction. Second only to Ben Stokes.
Trent Boult sold to Delhi for INR 2.2 crore, right after Jaydev Unadkat goes for INR 11.5 crore.
Shardul Thakur sold for INR 2.6 crore to CSK. This is their first buy of the day. At 26 years and 104 days, he is the youngest player in their squad
Delhi are out! KXIP buy Afghanistan spinner Mujeeb Zadran, 17 years old, for INR 4 crore. Welcome to the IPL Mujeeb!
Apoorv Wankhede, sold at base price of INR 20 lakh, to KKR.
Mumbai drop out after KKR make a bid of INR 80 lakh for Rinku Singh. Sold to KKR!
Sachin Baby sold to Sunrisers at base price, INR 20 lakh.
The last uncapped batsman is Manjot Kalra, base price INR 20 lakh. Delhi batsman, and Daredevils make the bid. He's with the India squad at the U-19 World Cup in New Zealand. That's the only bid. Sold to Delhi!
Uncapped allrounders are next. First up, Ankit Sharma, Madhya Pradesh and Rising Pune. INR 20 lakh base price. Royals make the first bid. He's played for them before too. Sold at base price!
Shivam Mavi, sold for INR 3 crore to KKR ,who also bought Mavi's U-19 new-ball partner Nagarkoti.
Abhishek Sharma, base price INR 20 lakh, hasn't played the IPL before. He is only 17 years old. Delhi make the bid, Sunrisers enter but drop out quickly. And then they come back in. And then they are out again. Delhi make the winning bid for Abhishek sharma at INR 55 lakh.
Delhi raise! Mumbai raise back ...INR 1.5 crore. Delhi are out. Mumbai buy Pradeep Sangwan for INR 1.5 crore.
Next up, Anureet Singh, base price INR 30 lakh. Royals begin the bidding. He's played for KXIP previously. That's the only bid. Sold to Royals!
Jagadeesan Narayan, base price INR 20 lakh, CSK make the opening bid. It is the closing bid too. Sold! He is their first uncapped player.
Mumbai are out! Royals with the bid at INR 60 lakh, Zahir Khan Pakteen, sold to Royals.
South African allrounder JP Duminy, base price INR 1 crore, played for Mumbai and Delhi, and opted out of last year's IPL .... and we have a  bid! Mumbai Indians! Who bought JP Duminy all those years ago when he had a break out series in Australia. He's coming home in the IPL. Sold!
England allrounder Chris Jordan, base price INR 1 crore, Sunrisers make a bid! He's played for them previously. No other bids. Sold at base price!
Mitchell Santner, NZ allrounder, base price INR 50 lakh, CSK make a bid with Fleming at the table. Sold!
Australian fast bowler Jason Beherendorff, base price INR 1 crore, and we have a bid from Mumbai Indians! Kings XI also bid.
Jason Behrendorff, sold to Mumbai Indians for INR 1.5 crore
Barinder Sran, sold to KXIP for INR 2.2 crore.
Billy Stanlake, sold at base price INR 50 lakh to Sunrisers Hyderabad. The Adelaide Strikers quick is their last overseas player
Tanmay Agarwal, base price INR 20 lakh, with Sunrisers last year and they bid for him again. That's the only bid. Sold!
CSK v KXIP for Deepak Chahar. KXIP drop out after CSK bid INR 50 lakh, but in come Delhi. Delhi v CSK, and the bid races to INR 80 lakh with CSK. Delhi are out. Sold at CSK at INR 80 lakh!
South African allrounder Cameron Delport, INR 30 lakh base price, and we have a bid from KKR! It is the only bid. Sold!
Tajinder Dhillon, sold to Mumbai Indians at INR 55 lakh.
Shreyas Gopal, Karnataka allrounder who bowls legspin, base price INR 20 lakh, has been part of the Mumbai Indians previously. Royals make the opening bid, the only bid. Sold!
RCB are out. Akshdeep Nath sold to KXIP for INR 1 crore.
RCB are out. Sunrisers buy Shreevats Goswami for INR 1 crore. Parthiv Patel was unsold at the same price yesterday.
Ben Dwarshuis sold to KXIP for INR 1.4 crore.
Kerala's Asif KM, base price INR 20 lakh, CSK make the opening bid really quickly ... Mumbai make another bid. It's at INR 40 lakh with CSK. Mumbai are out. Sold to CSK!
Sandeep Lamichhane, from Nepal, sold at base price INR 20 lakh to Delhi!
JJ Smuts, South Africa allrounder, base price INR 50 lakh, unsold.
Lungi Ngidi, South Africa fast bowler, base price INR 50 lakh, Fleming has made a bid at the CSK table. Sold at base price!
Punjab batsman Sharad Lamba, base price INR 20 lakh, Mumbai make the opening bid. The only bid. Sold!
Bengal seam bowling allrounder Kanishk Seth, base price INR 20 lakh, and CSK make the bid. sold at base price to CSK.
Dhruv Shorey, base price INR 20 lakh, CSK make another bid, and buy him at base price.
Anirudha Joshi, base price INR 20 lakh, we have a bid from RCB for the local boy. Sold!
Midhun S, Kerala leggie, INR 20 lakh base price. AND WE HAVE A BID! Royals buy him at base price!
M Vijay, base price INR 2 crore, was surprisingly unsold yesterday. CSK need an Indian opener, and CSK bid for Vijay, a local boy too! No other bids. Sold!
England keeper Sam Billings, base price INR 1 crore. CSK again! They have a lot of cash left in the purse. INR 9 crore odd. Sold!
Royals ask for time. And raise, Delhi raise again. INR 1.4 crore. Royals are out. Sold, Naman Ojha to Delhi at INR 1.4 crore.
Parthiv Patel, base price INR 1 crore. Mumbai begin the bidding for their old opener, and Royals are bidding as well. The bid hits INR 1.6 crore. Royals are out. RCB come in at INR 1.7 crore. Mumbai are out. Parthiv sold to RCB for INR 1.7 crore.
Mitchell Johnson, INR 2 crore base price. KKR make a bid for their sixth overseas player. It's the only bid. Sold!
New Zealand fast bowler Tim Southee, base price INR 1 crore. RCB make the bid. And Sold!
Siddesh Lad, INR 20 lakh base price, Mumbai make the opening bid, the only bid. Sold!
Prashant Chopra, INR 20 lakh base price, wicketkeeper. There's a bid, from Royals. Sold!
Anyone need this keeper? Aditya Tare, base price INR 20 lakh, and Mumbai make a bid. Sold!
Bipul Sharma, base price INR 20 lakh, Sunrisers make the opening bid. He was part of their squad last season, and will be again. Sold!
Sayan Ghosh, INR 20 lakh base price, Delhi make a bid. this will be their last player, their 25th player. They have maxed out their squad. They finish with INR 1.6 remaining in the purse.
Mayank Markande, base price INR 20 lakh, and this time he gets a bid! Mumbai make the bid. It's the only bid. Sold!
Aussie fast bowler Ben Laughlin, base price INR 50 lakh, and Royals make the bid. The only bid. Sold!
Akila Dananjaya, the Sri Lanka spinner, base price INR 50 lakh, and Mumbai ensure there will be a Sri Lankan presence in the IPL. Sold at base price! The only Sri Lankan player in the IPL. Mumbai have filled up all eight overseas slots.
Pradeep Sahu, base price INR 20 lakh, KXIP make the bid. He was with them last season. Sold!
Mayank Dagar, Sehwag's nephew, an allrounder, base price INR 20 lakh, and there is a bid from the KXIP XI table, where Sehwag is sat! Sold!
Anukul Roy, India-19 spinner at the World Cup in New Zealand, went unsold the first time at base price of INR 20 lakh. this time Mumbai make the bid. Sold!
England fast bowler Mark Wood, base price INR 1.5 crore. CSK make the bid! Only bid and sold! they have now maxed out their overseas quota.
Mahipal Lomror, base price INR 20 lakh. Royals make a bid. The only bid. Sold!
Mohsin Khan, uncapped fast bowler, INR 20 lakh base price, Mumbai make the bid. Sold!
Mehdi Hasan (not to be confused with the Bangladesh player), allrounder from Hyderabad, INR 20 lakh base price, Sunrisers make the bid! Sold! He's their last player, they have the maximum of 25 players in the squad.
CSK make the opening bid for allrounder Kshitiz Sharma at base price INR 20 lakh. Sold!
Monu Singh, base price INR 20 lakh, and there's a bid! From CSK. Sold! CSK are picking up a lot of these uncapped base price players.
CSK again! for Chaitanya Bishnoi, allrounder, at base price INR 20 lakh. Sold
Allrounder Jatin Saxena, INR 20 lakh base price, Royals make the opening bid. Sold!
Allrounder Aryaman Vikram Birla, INR 20 lakh, only 20 years old, Royals make the bid. But is there another one? There was going to be one, and the auctioneer is waiting a long time ... KXIP is the interested party ...and they bid INR 25 lakh. Royals raise! KXIP are out. Sold to Royals for INR 30 lakh!
RCB make a INR 20 lakh bid for allrounder Pavan Deshpande. Sold at base price.
For the third time, CHRIS GAYLE! Base price INR 2 crore. Is there a bid? Is there a bid? For the third time of asking ... There's a bid! KXIP make the bid for Gayle. His IPL career is not done. sold!
Dushmantha Chameera again, for the third time, Royals make the base price bid of INR 50 lakh. Sold! He's the second Sri Lankan in the IPL.
Nidheesh MD Dinesan, fast bowler, base price INR 20 lakh. Mumbai make a bid. Sold!
Manzoor Dar, allrounder, base price INR 20 lakh, sold to KXIP!
The final player is Javon Searles! West Indies allrounder on sale for the first time today! And KKR come in to bid, that's the last of their purse. He also plays for TKR in the CPL. Base price is INR 30 lakh, KKR have exactly 30 lakh. Sold! KKR are now purseless and the auction is over. What a finish!
Rafael Nadal Parera (Catalan: [r?'f?l n?'ðal p?'?e??], Spanish: [rafa'el na'ðal pa'?e?a];[2] born 3 June 1986) is a Spanish professional tennis player, currently world No. 2 in men's singles tennis by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP).[3]

Nadal has won 17 Grand Slam singles titles, the second most in history for a male player, as well as a record 33 ATP World Tour Masters 1000 titles, 20 ATP World Tour 500 tournaments, and the 2008 Olympic gold medal in singles. In addition, Nadal has held the number one ranking for a total of 196 weeks.[4] In majors, Nadal has won a record 11 French Open titles, three US Open titles, two Wimbledon titles, and one Australian Open title. Nadal has also won 57 clay court titles, including his 11 French Open titles, the most of any player in the Open Era. With 81 consecutive match wins on clay, Nadal has the longest single surface win streak of any player in the Open Era.

He was also a member of the winning Spain Davis Cup team in 2004, 2008, 2009, and 2011. In 2010, he became the seventh male player in history and youngest of five in the Open Era to achieve the Career Grand Slam at age 24. He is the second male player, after Andre Agassi, to complete the singles Career Golden Slam. In 2011, Nadal was named the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year.[5]


Contents
1	Early life
2	Professional tennis career
2.1	2001–2004
2.2	2005: First Grand Slam title
2.3	2006: Second French Open title
2.4	2007: Third French Open title
2.5	2008: Two majors, Olympic gold and No. 1
2.6	2009: Australian Open title
2.7	2010: Return to No. 1 and Career Grand Slam
2.8	2011: Sixth French Open title
2.9	2012: Seventh French Open title
2.10	2013: Two major titles, and world No. 1
2.11	2014: French Open title and injuries
2.12	2015: Continued struggles and rankings drop
2.13	2016: Second Olympic gold medal
2.14	2017: French and US Open titles and year-end No.1
2.15	2018: 11th French Open title
3	Rivalries
3.1	Nadal vs. Federer
3.2	Nadal vs. Djokovic
3.3	Nadal vs. Murray
3.4	Nadal vs. Wawrinka
4	Legacy
5	Playing style and coaching
6	Public image
6.1	Equipment and endorsements
6.2	Court name
6.3	In popular culture
6.4	Asteroid
7	Off the court
7.1	Involvement in football
7.2	Philanthropy
7.2.1	Fundación Rafa Nadal
7.3	Personal life
8	Career statistics
8.1	Grand Slam tournament performance timeline
8.2	Finals: 24 (17 titles, 7 runner-ups)
8.3	Records
8.3.1	All-time tournament records
8.3.2	Open Era records
9	See also
10	Notes
11	References
12	External links
12.1	Profiles
Early life
Rafael Nadal was born in Manacor, a town on the island of Mallorca in the Balearic Islands, Spain to parents Ana María Parera and Sebastián Nadal. His father is a businessman, owner of an insurance company, glass and window company Vidres Mallorca, and the restaurant, Sa Punta. Rafael has a younger sister, María Isabel. His uncle, Miguel Ángel Nadal, is a retired professional footballer, who played for RCD Mallorca, FC Barcelona, and the Spanish national team.[6] He idolized Barcelona striker Ronaldo as a child, and via his uncle got access to the Barcelona dressing room to have a photo with the Brazilian.[7] Nadal supports football clubs Real Madrid and RCD Mallorca.[8] Recognizing in Rafael a natural talent, another uncle, Toni Nadal, a former professional tennis player, introduced him to tennis when he was three years old.[9]

At age 8, Nadal won an under-12 regional tennis championship at a time when he was also a promising football player.[10] This made Toni Nadal intensify training, and at that time he encouraged Nadal to play left-handed for a natural advantage on the tennis court, as he noticed Nadal played forehand shots with two hands.[10]

At age 12, Nadal won the Spanish and European tennis titles in his age group, while also playing football full-time.[10] Nadal's father made him choose between football and tennis so that his school work would not deteriorate entirely. Nadal said: "I chose tennis. Football had to stop straight away."[10]

When he was 14, the Spanish tennis federation requested that Nadal leave Mallorca and move to Barcelona to continue his tennis training. His family turned down this request, partly because they feared his education would suffer,[10] but also because Toni said that "I don't want to believe that you have to go to America, or other places to be a good athlete. You can do it from your home."[9] The decision to stay home meant less financial support from the federation; instead, Nadal's father covered the costs. In May 2001, he defeated former Grand Slam tournament champion Pat Cash in a clay-court exhibition match.[6]

Professional tennis career
2001–2004
Nadal turned professional at age 15,[11] and participated in two events on the ITF junior circuit. On 29 April 2002, at 15 years and 10 months, the world No. 762 Nadal won his first ATP match, defeating Ramón Delgado,[12] and became the ninth player in the Open Era to do so before the age of 16.[13]

In 2001, Nadal finished the year with a Challenger series record of 1–1 in singles with no titles or finals appearances. He did not participate in any doubles Challengers events. At ITF Futures, Nadal's record was 7–5 in singles and 1–2 in doubles, with no titles or finals appearances.[14]

In 2002, aged 16, Nadal reached the semifinals of the Boys' Singles tournament at Wimbledon, in his first ITF junior event.[15] In the same year, he helped Spain defeat the US in the final of the Junior Davis Cup in his second, and final, appearance on the ITF junior circuit.[15][16] Nadal's Challenger level record in 2002 was 4–2 in singles with no titles. He did not participate in any doubles Challengers events. Nadal finished the year with a Futures record of 40–9 in singles and 10-9 in doubles. He won 6 singles tournaments at this level, including 5 on clay and 1 on hard courts. He did not reach any doubles finals.[17][18] Nadal also entered the clay-court Mallorca Open, part of the ATP International Series, at the end of April as a wildcard, where he participated in both singles and doubles. In singles, Nadal won his first ever ATP match, defeating Ramon Delgado in the Round of 32. He then was defeated in the Round of 16 by Olivier Rochus.[19] In doubles, Nadal and his partner, Bartolome Salva-Vidal, were defeated in the first round by David Adams and Simon Aspelin.[20]


Rafael Nadal singles-ranking history chart through July 2018

Singles ranking composite history chart through July 2018 (Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal, Novak Djokovic)
In 2003, Nadal won two Challenger titles and finished the year ranked No. 49. He won the ATP Newcomer of the Year Award. In his Wimbledon debut in 2003, he became the youngest man to reach the third round since Boris Becker in 1984.[21] After Wimbledon Nadal participated at Bastad, where he lost to Nicolas Lapentti in the quarterfinals, and at Stuttgart, where he lost to Fernando Gonzalez in the Round of 32. Finally, at Umag, he lost to Carlos Moya in the semifinals. After playing two more Challenger level events, the last Challenger tournaments of his career, Nadal finished his 2003 campaign with three first round losses in ATP events.[14] Nadal also competed in seven doubles tournaments in 2003, and won his first ATP title (doubles or singles) at the clay-court Croatia Open in Umag, where he partnered with Alex Lopez Moron to defeat Todd Perry and Thomas Shimada in straight sets in the final.[22]

2004 started with a doubles championship alongside Tommy Robredo at the Maharashtra Open.[23] In singles, Nadal reached the third round of the 2004 Australian Open where he lost in three sets against Australian Lleyton Hewitt. Later that year, the 34th-ranked 17-year-old played the first of many matches against Federer, then ranked No. 1, at the Miami Open, and won in straight sets,[24][25] before losing to Fernando González in the fourth round. He was one of the six players who defeated Federer that year (along with Tim Henman, Albert Costa, Gustavo Kuerten, Dominik Hrbatý, and Tomáš Berdych). He missed most of the clay court season, including the French Open, because of a stress fracture in his left ankle.[6] In August, Nadal won his first ATP singles title at the Prokom Open by defeating José Acasuso in the final in two sets.[26]

Nadal, at 18 years and six months, became the youngest player to register a singles victory in a Davis Cup final for a winning nation.[27] By beating No. 2 Andy Roddick, he helped Spain clinch the 2004 title over the United States in a 3–2 win. He finished the year ranked No. 51.

2005: First Grand Slam title
Main article: 2005 Rafael Nadal tennis season
At the 2005 Australian Open, Nadal lost in the fourth round to eventual runner-up Lleyton Hewitt. Two months later, he reached the final of the 2005 Miami Masters, and despite being two points from a straight-sets victory, he was defeated in five sets by No. 1 Roger Federer. Both performances were considered breakthroughs for Nadal.[28][29]

He then dominated the spring clay court season. He won 24 consecutive singles matches, breaking Andre Agassi's Open Era record of consecutive match wins for a male teenager.[30] Nadal won the Torneo Conde de Godó in Barcelona and beat 2004 French Open runner-up Guillermo Coria in the finals of the 2005 Monte Carlo Masters and the 2005 Rome Masters. These victories raised his ranking to No. 5[31] and made him one of the favorites at his career-first French Open. On his 19th birthday, Nadal defeated Federer in the 2005 French Open semifinals, being one of only four players to defeat the top-seeded player that year (along with Marat Safin, Richard Gasquet, and David Nalbandian). Two days later, he defeated Mariano Puerta in the final, becoming the second male player, after Mats Wilander in 1982, to win the French Open on his first attempt. He was the first teenager to win a Grand Slam singles title since Pete Sampras won the 1990 US Open at age 19.[6] Winning improved his ranking to No. 3.[31]

Early in his career, Nadal became known for his habit of biting the trophies he won.[32]

Three days after his victory in Paris, Nadal's 24-match winning streak was snapped in the first round of the grass court Gerry Weber Open in Halle, Germany, where he lost to Alexander Waske.[33] He then lost in the second round of 2005 Wimbledon to Gilles Müller of Luxembourg.

Immediately after Wimbledon, Nadal won 16 consecutive matches and three consecutive tournaments, bringing his ranking to No. 2 on 25 July 2005.

Nadal started his North American summer hard-court season by defeating Agassi in the final of the 2005 Canada Masters, but lost in the first round of the 2005 Cincinnati Masters. Nadal was seeded second at the 2005 US Open, but was upset in the third round by No. 49 James Blake in four sets.

In September, he defeated Coria in the final of the China Open in Beijing and won both of his Davis Cup matches against Italy. In October, he won his fourth ATP Masters Series title of the year, defeating Ivan Ljubicic in the final of the 2005 Madrid Masters. He then suffered a foot injury that prevented his competing in the year-ending Tennis Masters Cup.[34]

Both Nadal and Federer won eleven singles titles and four ATP Masters Series titles in 2005. Nadal broke Mats Wilander's previous teenage record of nine in 1983.[35] Nine of Nadal's titles were on clay, and the remainder were on hard courts. Nadal won 79 matches, second only to Federer's 81. Nadal won the Golden Bagel Award for 2005, with eleven 6–0 sets during the year.[36] Also, he earned the highest year-end ranking ever by a Spaniard and the ATP Most Improved Player of the Year award.

2006: Second French Open title
Main article: 2006 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Nadal missed the Australian Open because of a foot injury.[37] In February, he lost in the semifinals of the first tournament he played, the Open 13 tournament in Marseille, France. Two weeks later, he handed Roger Federer his first loss of the year in the final of the Dubai Duty Free Men's Open (in 2006, Rafael Nadal and Andy Murray were the only two men who defeated Federer). To complete the spring hard-court season, Nadal was upset in the semifinals of the Pacific Life Open in Indian Wells, California, by James Blake, and was upset in the second round of the 2006 Miami Masters.

On European clay, Nadal won all four tournaments he entered and 24 consecutive matches. He defeated Federer in the final of the Masters Series Monte Carlo in four sets. The following week, he defeated Tommy Robredo in the final of the Open Sabadell Atlántico tournament in Barcelona. After a one-week break, Nadal won the Masters Series Internazionali BNL d'Italia in Rome, defeating Federer in a fifth-set tiebreaker in the final, after saving two match points and equaling Björn Borg's tally of 16 ATP titles won as a teenager. Nadal broke Argentinian Guillermo Vilas's 29-year male record of 53 consecutive clay-court match victories by winning his first round match at the French Open. Vilas presented Nadal with a trophy, but commented later that Nadal's feat was less impressive than his own because Nadal's winning streak covered two years and was accomplished by adding easy tournaments to his schedule.[38]

Nadal went on to play Federer in the final of the French Open. The first two sets of the match were hardly competitive, as the rivals traded 6–1 sets. Nadal won the third set easily and served for the match in the fourth set before Federer broke him and forced a tiebreaker. Nadal won the tiebreaker and became the first to defeat Federer in a Grand Slam tournament final.[39]


2006 Roland Garros champion
Nadal injured his shoulder during a quarterfinal match against Lleyton Hewitt at the Artois Championships, played on grass at the Queen's Club in London.[40] Nadal was unable to complete the match, which ended his 26-match winning streak. Nadal was seeded second at Wimbledon, and was two points from defeat against American qualifier Robert Kendrick in the second round before coming back to win in five sets. In the third round, Nadal defeated No. 20 Andre Agassi in straight sets in Agassi's last career match at Wimbledon. Nadal also won his next three matches in straight sets, which set up his first Wimbledon final, which was against Federer, who had won this tournament the three previous years. Nadal was the first Spanish man since Manuel Santana in 1966, to reach the Wimbledon final, but Federer won the match in four sets to win his fourth consecutive Wimbledon title.

During the lead up to the US Open, Nadal played the two Masters Series tournaments in North America. He was upset in the third round of the Rogers Cup in Toronto and the quarterfinals of the Western & Southern Financial Group Masters in Cincinnati. Nadal was seeded second at the US Open, but lost in the quarterfinals to No. 54 Mikhail Youzhny of Russia in four sets.

Nadal played only three tournaments the remainder of the year. Joachim Johansson, ranked No. 690, upset Nadal in the second round of the Stockholm Open. The following week, Nadal lost to Tomáš Berdych in the quarterfinals of the year's last Masters Series tournament, the Mutua Madrileña Masters in Madrid. During the round-robin stage of the year-ending Tennis Masters Cup, Nadal lost to James Blake but defeated Nikolay Davydenko and Robredo. Because of those two victories, Nadal qualified for the semifinals, where he lost to Federer. This was Nadal's third loss in nine career matches with Federer.

Nadal went on to become the first player since Andre Agassi in 1994–95 to finish the year ranked No. 2 in consecutive years.

2007: Third French Open title
Main article: 2007 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Nadal started the year by playing in six hard-court tournaments. He lost in the semifinals and first round of his first two tournaments and then lost in the quarterfinals of the Australian Open to eventual runner-up Fernando González. After another quarterfinal loss at the Dubai Tennis Championships, he won the 2007 Indian Wells Masters, before Novak Djokovic defeated him in the quarterfinals of the 2007 Miami Masters.

He had comparatively more success after returning to Europe to play five clay-court tournaments. He won the titles at the Masters Series Monte Carlo, the Open Sabadell Atlántico in Barcelona, and the Masters Series Internazionali BNL d'Italia in Rome, before losing to Roger Federer in the final of the Masters Series Hamburg. This defeat ended his 81-match winning streak on clay, which is the male Open Era record for consecutive wins on a single surface. He then rebounded to win the French Open for the third straight year, defeating Federer once again in the final.

Between the tournaments in Barcelona and Rome, Nadal defeated Federer in the "Battle of Surfaces" exhibition match in Mallorca, Spain, with the tennis court being half grass and half clay.[41]

Nadal played the Artois Championships at the Queen's Club in London for the second consecutive year. As in 2006, Nadal was upset in the quarterfinals. Nadal then won consecutive five-set matches during the third and fourth rounds of Wimbledon before being beaten by Federer in the five-set final. This was Federer's first five-set match at Wimbledon since 2001.[42]

In July, Nadal won the clay court Mercedes Cup in Stuttgart, which proved to be his last title of the year. He played three important tournaments during the North American summer hard court season. He was a semifinalist at the Masters Series Rogers Cup in Montreal before losing his first match at the Western & Southern Financial Group Masters in Cincinnati. He was the second-seeded player at the US Open, but was defeated in the fourth round by David Ferrer.

After a month-long break from tournament tennis, Nadal played the Mutua Madrileña Masters in Madrid and the BNP Paribas Masters in Paris. David Nalbandian upset him in the quarterfinals and final of those tournaments. To end the year, Nadal won two of his three-round robin matches to advance to the semifinals of the Tennis Masters Cup in Shanghai, where Federer defeated him in straight sets.

During the second half of the year, Nadal battled a knee injury suffered during the Wimbledon final. In addition, there were rumors at the end of the year that the foot injury he suffered during 2005, caused long-term damage, which were given credence by coach Toni Nadal's claim that the problem was "serious". Nadal and his spokesman strongly denied this, however, with Nadal himself calling the story "totally false".[43]

2008: Two majors, Olympic gold and No. 1
Main article: 2008 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Nadal began the year in India, where he was comprehensively beaten by Mikhail Youzhny in the final of the Chennai Open. Nadal then reached the semifinals of the Australian Open for the first time. Jo-Wilfried Tsonga defeated Nadal in the semifinal of 2008 Australian Open. Nadal also reached the final of the Miami Masters for the second time.

During the spring clay-court season, Nadal won four singles titles and defeated Roger Federer in three finals. He beat Federer at the Masters Series Monte Carlo for the third straight year, capturing his Open Era record fourth consecutive title there.[44] Nadal then won his fourth consecutive title at the Open Sabadell Atlántico tournament in Barcelona. A few weeks later, Nadal won his first title at the Masters Series Hamburg, defeating Federer in a three-set final. He then won the French Open, becoming the fifth man in the Open Era to win a Grand Slam singles title without losing a set.[45] He defeated Federer in the final for the third straight year, but this was the most lopsided of all their matches, as Nadal only lost four games and gave Federer his first bagel since 1999.[44] This was Nadal's fourth consecutive French title, tying Björn Borg's all-time record. Nadal became the fourth male player during Open era to win the same Grand Slam singles tournament four consecutive years (the others being Borg, Pete Sampras, and Federer).

Nadal then played Federer in the final of Wimbledon for the third consecutive year, in the most anticipated match of their rivalry.[46][47] Nadal entered the final on a 23-match winning streak, including his first career grass-court title at the Artois Championships staged at the Queen's Club in London prior to Wimbledon. Federer had won his record fifth grass-court title at the Gerry Weber Open in Halle, and then reached the Wimbledon final without losing a set. Unlike their previous two Wimbledon finals, though, Federer was not the prohibitive favorite, and many analysts picked Nadal to win.[47][48] They played the longest (in terms of time on court, not in terms of numbers of games) final in Wimbledon history, and because of rain delays, Nadal won the fifth set 9–7 in near-darkness. The match was widely lauded as the greatest Wimbledon final ever, with some tennis critics even calling it the greatest match in tennis history.[49][50][51][52][53]

By winning his first Wimbledon title, Nadal became the third man in the open era to win both the French Open and Wimbledon in the same year, after Rod Laver in 1969, and Borg in 1978–1980, (Federer later accomplished this the following year) as well as the second Spaniard to win Wimbledon. He also ended Federer's record streak of five consecutive Wimbledon titles and 65 straight wins on grass courts. This was also the first time that Nadal won two Grand Slam tournaments back-to-back.

After Wimbledon, Nadal extended his winning streak to a career-best 32 matches. He won his second Rogers Cup title in Toronto, and then made it into the semifinals of the Western & Southern Financial Group Masters in Cincinnati. As a result, Nadal clinched the US Open Series and, combined with Federer's early-round losses in both of those tournaments, finally earned the world No. 1 ranking on 18 August, officially ending Federer's record four-and-a-half-year reign at the top.

At the 2008 Beijing Olympics, Nadal defeated Fernando González of Chile in the final to win his first Olympic gold medal.[54]

At the US Open, Nadal was the top-seeded player for the first time at a Grand Slam tournament. He did not lose a set during his first three matches, defeating qualifiers in the first and second rounds and Viktor Troicki in the third round. In the semifinals, he lost to Andy Murray. Later in the year in Madrid, Nadal helped Spain defeat the United States in the Davis Cup semifinals.

At the Mutua Madrileña Masters in Madrid, Nadal lost in the semifinals to Gilles Simon. However, his performance at the event guaranteed that he would become the first Spaniard during the open era to finish the year ranked No. 1.[55] Two weeks later at the BNP Paribas Masters in Paris, Nadal reached the quarterfinals, where he withdrew because of a knee injury.[56] The following week, Nadal announced his withdrawal from the year-ending Tennis Masters Cup in Shanghai, citing tendinitis of the knee. On 10 November, Nadal withdrew from Spain's Davis Cup final against Argentina, as his knee injury had not healed completely.[57]

2009: Australian Open title
Main article: 2009 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Nadal's first official ATP tour event for the year was the 250 series Qatar Open in Doha, where he lost in the quarterfinals to Gaël Monfils. Nadal also entered and won the tournament's doubles event with partner Marc López, defeating the No. 1-ranked doubles team of Daniel Nestor and Nenad Zimonjic in the final.

At the 2009 Australian Open, Nadal won his first five matches without dropping a set, before defeating compatriot Fernando Verdasco in the semifinals in the second longest match in Australian Open history at 5 hours and 14 minutes.[58] This win set up a championship match with Roger Federer, their first meeting ever in a hard-court Grand Slam tournament. Nadal defeated Federer in five sets to earn his first hard-court Grand Slam singles title,[59] making him the first Spaniard to win the Australian Open.[60]

At the ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament in Rotterdam, Nadal lost in the final to second-seeded Andy Murray in three sets.[61] Although this knee problem was not associated with Nadal's right knee tendonitis, it was serious enough to cause him to withdraw from the Dubai Championships a week later.[62] In March, Nadal helped Spain defeat Serbia in a Davis Cup World Group first-round tie on clay in Benidorm, Spain. Nadal defeated Janko Tipsarevic and Novak Djokovic.[63][64]

At the 2009 Indian Wells Masters, Nadal won his thirteenth Masters 1000 series tournament, defeating Murray in the final. The next ATP tour event was the 2009 Miami Masters. Nadal advanced to the quarterfinals, where he again faced Argentinian del Potro, this time losing the match.[65]

Nadal began his European clay court season at the Monte Carlo Masters, where he defeated Novak Djokovic to win a record fifth consecutive singles title there.[66] He then won back to back titles in Barcelona and Rome Masters, defeating Ferrer and Djokovic respectively.[67][68] He then surprisingly lost the final of the Madrid Open to Roger Federer. This was the first time that Nadal had lost to Federer since the semifinals of the 2007 Tennis Masters Cup.


Nadal at 2009 Sony Ericsson Open, Miami, Florida, United States
By beating Lleyton Hewitt in the third round of French Open, Nadal set a record of 31 consecutive wins at Roland Garros, beating the previous record of 28 by Björn Borg. This run came to an end on 31 May 2009, when Nadal lost to eventual runner-up, Robin Söderling in the 4th round. This was Nadal's first and, until 2015, only loss at the French Open.

After his surprise defeat at Roland Garros, Nadal withdrew from the AEGON Championships. It was confirmed that he was suffering from tendinitis in both of his knees.[69] On 19 June, Nadal withdrew from the 2009 Wimbledon Championships, citing his recurring knee injury.[70] Roger Federer went on to win the title, and Nadal consequently dropped back to No. 2 on 6 July 2009.

On 4 August, Toni Nadal confirmed that Nadal would return to play at the Rogers Cup in Montreal.[71] There, he lost in the quarterfinals to Juan Martín del Potro.[72] With this loss, he relinquished the No. 2 spot to Andy Murray on 17 August 2009, ranking outside the top two for the first time since 25 July 2005.

At the US Open Nadal fell in the semifinals, losing to eventual champion Juan Martín del Potro.[73]

At the World Tour Finals, Nadal lost all three of his matches against Robin Söderling, Nikolay Davydenko, and Novak Djokovic respectively without winning a set.

In December, Nadal participated in the second Davis Cup final of his career. He defeated Tomáš Berdych in his first singles rubber to give the Spanish Davis Cup Team their first point in the tie. After the Spanish Davis Cup team had secured its fourth Davis Cup victory, Nadal defeated Jan Hájek in the first Davis Cup dead rubber of his career.

Nadal finished the year as No. 2 for the fourth time in five years. Nadal won the Golden Bagel Award for the third time in 2009, with nine 6–0 sets during the year.

2010: Return to No. 1 and Career Grand Slam
Main article: 2010 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Nadal began the year by participating in the Capitala World Tennis Championship in Abu Dhabi. In the final, Nadal defeated Robin Söderling in straight sets.[74] Nadal participated in the Qatar ExxonMobil Open ATP 250 event in Doha, where he lost in the finals to Nikolay Davydenko.[75][75] In the Australian Open, Nadal reached the quarterfinals, where he had to pull out at 3–0 down in the third set against Andy Murray.[76] After examining Nadal's knees, doctors told him that he should take two weeks of rest, and then two weeks of rehabilitation.

Nadal reached the semifinals in singles at the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, where he was defeated by Ivan Ljubicic in three sets.[77] After Indian Wells, Nadal reached the semifinals of the Sony Ericsson Open, where he lost to eventual champion Andy Roddick in three sets.[78]

Nadal won the Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters, beating Fernando Verdasco in the final. With this win, Nadal became the first player in the open era to win a tournament title for six straight years.[79] Nadal next chose to skip the Barcelona tournament, and his next tournament was the Rome Masters. He defeated David Ferrer in the final for his fifth title at Rome.


Nadal at the 2010 Mutua Madrileña Madrid Open, Madrid, Spain
Nadal then won the 2010 Mutua Madrileña Madrid Open, defeating Roger Federer in straight sets. The win gave him his 18th Masters title, breaking the all-time record. Nadal moved back to No. 2 the following day.

Entering the French Open, many were expecting another Nadal-Federer final. However, Robin Söderling defeated Federer in the quarterfinals.[80] Nadal advanced to the final and defeated Söderling in straight sets. The victory at Roland Garros marked the second time that Nadal had won the French Open without dropping a set.

In June, Nadal entered the AEGON Championships, which he had won in 2008. He was defeated by compatriot Feliciano López in the quartefinals. At the Wimbledon Championships, he won his first two matches in straight sets. In the third round he needed five sets to defeat Philipp Petzschner. During the match Nadal was warned twice for allegedly receiving coaching from his coach and uncle, Toni Nadal, resulting in a $2,000 fine by Wimbledon officials.[81][82] He then defeated Andy Murray in the semifinals and Tomáš Berdych in the final to win his second Wimbledon title and his eighth career major title[83] just past the age of 24.[84]

In his first tournament since Wimbledon, Nadal advanced to the semifinals of the Rogers Cup, where he was defeated by Andy Murray.[85] Nadal also competed in the doubles with Djokovic in a high-profile partnership between the world No. 1 and No. 2.[86] The pair lost in the first round to Milos Raonic and Vasek Pospisil. The next week, Nadal was the top seed at the Cincinnati Masters, losing in the quarterfinals to Marcos Baghdatis.

At the 2010 US Open, Nadal reached his first final without dropping a set. In the final, he defeated Novak Djokovic in four sets, completing the Career Grand Slam for Nadal; he also became the second male after Andre Agassi to complete a Career Golden Slam.[87]

Nadal's US Open victory meant that he also became the first man to win majors on clay, grass, and hard courts in the same year, and the first to win the French Open, Wimbledon, and the US Open in the same year since Rod Laver in 1969.[88] Nadal's victory also clinched the year-end No. 1 ranking for 2010.[89]

Nadal began his Asian tour at the 2010 PTT Thailand Open in Bangkok where he lost to compatriot Guillermo García-López in the semifinals. Nadal was able to regroup, winning the 2010 Rakuten Japan Open Tennis Championships in Tokyo by defeating Gaël Monfils for his seventh title of the season. Nadal next played in the Shanghai Rolex Masters, where he lost to No. 12 Jürgen Melzer in the third round. On 5 November, Nadal announced that he was pulling out of the Paris Masters owing to tendinitis in his left shoulder.[90] On 21 November 2010, in London, Nadal won the Stefan Edberg Sportsmanship Award for the first time.[91]

At the 2010 ATP World Tour Finals in London, Nadal won all of his round-robin matches. In the semifinal, he defeated Murray in three sets, before losing to Roger Federer in the final.[92]

2011: Sixth French Open title
Main article: 2011 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Nadal started 2011 by participating in the Mubadala World Tennis Championship in Abu Dhabi. In the final, he won over Roger Federer. At the Qatar ExxonMobil Open, he fell in straight sets Nikolay Davydenko in the semifinals.[93] He and countryman López won the doubles title by defeating Daniele Bracciali and Andreas Seppi.[94]


Nadal at the 2011 Australian Open
In the quarterfinals of the Australian Open, Nadal suffered a hamstring injury against David Ferrer early in the pair's quarterfinal match and ultimately lost in straight sets, thus ending his effort to win four major tournaments in a row.[95]

In March, Nadal helped Spain defeat Belgium in a 2011 Davis Cup World Group first-round tie in the Spiroudome in Charleroi, Belgium. Nadal defeated Ruben Bemelmans and Olivier Rochus.[96][97]

At both the 2011 BNP Paribas Open and the 2011 Sony Ericsson Open, Nadal reached the final and lost to Novak Djokovic in three sets.[98][99] This was the first time Nadal reached the finals of Indian Wells and Miami in the same year.

Nadal began his clay-court season by winning the 2011 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters with the loss of just one set. In the final, he avenged his defeat by David Ferrer in the quarterfinals of the Australian Open.[100] Just a week later, Nadal won his sixth Barcelona Open crown, again defeating Ferrer in straight sets. He then lost to Novak Djokovic in the Rome Masters and Madrid Open finals.[101] However, Nadal retained his No. 1 ranking during the clay-court season and won his sixth French Open title by defeating Roger Federer.[102]

At Wimbledon, Nadal reached the final after three four-set matches. This set up a final against No. 2 Novak Djokovic, who had beaten Nadal in all four of their matches in 2011. After dropping the third set, Djokovic defeated Nadal in the fourth. Djokovic's success at the tournament also meant that the Serb overtook Nadal as world No. 1.

After resting for a month from a foot injury sustained during Wimbledon, he contested the 2011 Rogers Cup, where he was beaten by Croatian Ivan Dodig in the quarterfinals. He next played in the 2011 Cincinnati Masters, where he lost to Mardy Fish, again in the quarterfinals.

At the 2011 US Open, Nadal made headlines when after defeating David Nalbandian on in the fourth round, he collapsed in his post-match press conference because to severe cramps.[103] He again lost in four sets to Novak Djokovic in the final.

After the US Open, Nadal made the final of the Japan Open Tennis Championships. Nadal, who was the 2010 champion, was defeated by Andy Murray. At the Shanghai Masters, he was upset in the third round by No. 23 ranked Florian Mayer. At the 2011 ATP World Tour Finals, Nadal was defeated by Roger Federer and Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in the round-robin stage, and was subsequently eliminated from the tournament. In the Davis Cup final in December, he helped Spain win the title with victories over Juan Mónaco and Juan Martín del Potro.[104]

2012: Seventh French Open title
Main article: 2012 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Nadal began his ATP World Tour season at the Qatar Open. In the semifinal he lost to Gaël Monfils in two sets.[105]

In the Australian Open Nadal won his first four matches without dropping a set. He then won in his quarterfinal and semifinal matches against Tomáš Berdych and Roger Federer respectively. In the final, on 29 January, he was beaten by Novak Djokovic in a five-set match that lasted 5 hours and 53 minutes, the longest Grand Slam final of all time.[106]

Nadal made it to the semifinals in Indian Wells, where he was beaten in straight sets by eventual champion Roger Federer. He also made the semifinals in Miami, but withdrew because of knee problems.

As the clay court season started, Nadal was seeded 2nd at the 2012 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters. In the final he topped No. 1 Novak Djokovic to win his 8th consecutive Monte Carlo trophy. This ended a streak of seven straight final losses to Djokovic.

A day after the Monte Carlo final, Nadal traveled to Barcelona where he received a bye in the first round. His tremendous record on clay continued as he beat compatriot David Ferrer in a three-set final to clinch his seventh title in eight years at the Barcelona Open.

At the Mutua Madrileña Madrid Open Nadal surprisingly lost to Fernando Verdasco, whom he held a 13–0 record against. He heavily criticized the new blue-colored clay and threatened not to attend in the future if the surface was not changed back to red clay. Several other players such as Novak Djokovic voiced similar criticism.[107]

In the last tournament before the French Open, Nadal defeated Djokovic in a tight straight set final. This was his second victory over Novak Djokovic in 2012 and his third title of the season, as well as his 6th Rome title overall.

At the 2012 French Open, Nadal dropped only 30 games against his first five opponents. In the semifinals he dismantled Ferrer to set up another final against Novak Djokovic. This marked the first time two opposing players faced each other in four consecutive Grand Slam finals. Nadal won the first two sets before Djokovic claimed the third. Play was suspended in the fourth set due to rain. When the match resumed the following day, Nadal won when Djokovic double faulted on match point, sealing a record 7th Roland Garros title for Nadal.[108] By winning his seventh title[109] at Roland Garros, Nadal surpassed Borg's overall titles record[110] to become the most successful male player in French Open history.[111] Nadal only lost a total of three sets in the 2012 clay court season.

As a warm-up ahead of Wimbledon Nadal played in Halle, losing to Philipp Kohlschreiber in the quarterfinals.[112] At Wimbledon, Nadal was upset in the second round by Lukáš Rosol in a close five-set match. This was the first time since the Wimbledon 2005 championships that Nadal had failed to progress past the 2nd round of a Grand Slam tournament.[113]

In July 2012, Nadal withdrew from the 2012 Olympics owing to tendinitis in his knee, which subsequently led to him pulling out of both the Rogers Cup and the Cincinnati Masters. He later withdrew from the rest of the 2012 season, as he felt he still was not healthy enough to compete.[114][115] Nadal ended 2012 ranked No. 4 in the world, the first time in eight years that he has not been ranked 1st or 2nd at the end of the year.

2013: Two major titles, and world No. 1
Main article: 2013 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Two weeks prior to the Australian Open, Nadal officially withdrew from the tournament citing a stomach virus.[116] Nadal's withdrawal saw him drop out of the ATP's Top Four for the first time since 2005.[117]

Playing in his first tournaments in South America since 2005, Nadal made his comeback at the VTR Open in Chile,[118] where he was upset by Argentine No. 73 Horacio Zeballos in the final. At the Brasil Open, Nadal reached the final, where he defeated David Nalbandian.[119] In the title match of the Abierto Mexicano Telcel in Acapulco, Nadal defeated David Ferrer, losing just two games in the match.


Nadal at the 2013 BNP Paribas Open
Nadal then returned to the American hard courts, playing the Indian Wells Masters as the fifth seed. He lost only one set, and defeated No. 2 Roger Federer and No. 6 Tomáš Berdych before beating Juan Martín del Potro in the final.

After withdrawing from Miami, Nadal attempted to defend his title at the Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters, but was beaten by Djokovic in straight sets. He then won his eight title at the Barcelona Open. Nadal went on to win the Mutua Madrid Open, beating Stanislas Wawrinka in the final.


Nadal at the 2013 Mutua Madrid Open
. In May, he defeated Roger Federer for his 7th championship at the 2013 Rome Masters. These victories raised his ranking to No. 4.

Nadal won the 2013 French Open after beating Novak Djokovic in the semifinal and David Ferrer in the final, breaking the record for the most match wins in the tournament in the process with his 59th match victory.[120] His match with Djokovic is widely considered one of the greatest clay court matches ever played, as Nadal came back from down a break in the fifth set to take out a hard-fought 4-hour, 37-minute victory.

Nadal then lost his first-round match at the 2013 Wimbledon Championships in straight sets to unseeded Belgian Steve Darcis (ranked No. 135), the first time he had ever lost in the first round of a Grand Slam.

In August, Nadal won a close semifinal match in Montreal, denying Djokovic his fourth Rogers Cup title.[121] Nadal proceeded to win the title after beating Milos Raonic in the final in straight sets.[122] He won his 26th ATP Masters 1000 in Cincinnati on Sunday 18 August after beating John Isner in the final.[123] Nadal concluded a brilliant North American hard court season with his 4th hard court title of the year, defeating Djokovic at the 2013 US Open final in four sets, bringing his Grand Slam count to 13 and giving him a male tennis record paycheck of $3.6 million.[124][125]

Later in September, Nadal helped Spain secure their Davis Cup World Group Playoff spot for 2014, with a victory against Sergiy Stakhovsky and a doubles win with Marc Lopez. In October, he reached the final of the China Open, guaranteeing he would be back to the No. 1 ranking.[126] In the final, he was beaten by Djokovic in straight sets.[127] At the 2013 Shanghai Rolex Masters, he reached the semifinals but was defeated by Del Potro.

In November, Nadal played his final event of the season in London at the 2013 ATP World Tour Finals where he secured the year-end No. 1 spot. He beat David Ferrer, Stanislas Wawrinka and Tomáš Berdych in the round robin stage to set up a semifinal victory over Roger Federer. Nadal met Djokovic in the final, losing in straight sets.

2014: French Open title and injuries
Main article: 2014 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Rafael Nadal began his 2014 season at the Qatar Open in Doha, defeating Lukáš Rosol in the first round[128] and he won the title after defeating Gaël Monfils in the final.[129]

At the Australian Open, he defeated Roger Federer to reach his third Australian Open final. This marked Nadal's 11th consecutive victory in a Major semifinal, second only to Borg's all-time record of 14. In the final, he faced Stanislas Wawrinka, against whom he entered the match with a 12–0 record. However, Nadal suffered a back injury during the warm-up, which progressively worsened as the match wore on.[130] Nadal lost the first two sets, and although he won the third set, he ultimately lost the match in four sets. The first tournament he played after that was the inaugural Rio Open which he won after defeating Alexandr Dolgopolov in the final. However, at the Indian Wells Masters, Dolgopolov would avenge his loss, defeating Nadal in three sets in the third round. He reached the final of the Miami Masters, falling to Novak Djokovic in straight sets.

Nadal began his clay court season with a quarterfinal loss to David Ferrer in the Monte-Carlo Masters. He was stunned by Nicolas Almagro in the quarterfinals of the Barcelona Open. Nadal then won his 27th masters title at the Madrid Open after Kei Nishikori retired in the third set of the final.</ref>[131] On 8 June 2014, Nadal defeated Novak Djokovic in the Men's Singles French Open final to win his 9th French Open title and a 5th straight win at Roland Garros. Nadal equaled Pete Sampras' total of 14 Grand Slam wins.[132] Nadal then lost in the second round of the Halle Open to Dustin Brown the following week.[133]

Nadal entered the Wimbledon Championships in a bid to win the tournament for the third time. In the fourth round he was upset by Australian teenager Nick Kyrgios in four sets.[134]

Nadal withdrew from the American swing owing to a wrist injury.[135] He made his return at the 2014 China Open but was defeated in the quarterfinals by Martin Klizan in three sets.[136] At the 2014 Shanghai Rolex Masters, he was suffering from appendicitis. He lost his opening match to Feliciano Lopez in straight sets.[137] Later, he was upset by Borna Coric at the quarterfinals of the 2014 Swiss Indoors. After the loss, he announced that he would skip the rest of the season to undergo surgery for his appendix.[138]

2015: Continued struggles and rankings drop
Main article: 2015 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Nadal began the year as the defending Champion at the Qatar Open, but suffered a shocking three set defeat to Michael Berrer in the first round.[139] He won the doubles title with Juan Mónaco. At the Australian Open, Nadal lost in straight sets to Tomáš Berdych in the quarterfinal, thus ending a 17-match winning streak against the seventh-seeded Czech.[140]


Nadal at the 2015 Aegon Championships in London
In February, Nadal lost in the semifinals to Fabio Fognini at the Rio Open,[141] before going on to win his 46th career clay-court title against Juan Mónaco at the Argentina Open.[142] Nadal then participated at the Indian Wells and Miami Open but suffered early defeats to Milos Raonic and Fernando Verdasco, in the quarterfinals and third round respectively.[143][144] Nadal then began his spring clay season at the Monte Carlo Masters and reached the semifinals where he lost to Novak Djokovic in straight sets.[145] After losing to Fognini again at the Barcelona Open quarterfinals,[146] Nadal entered the Madrid Open as the two-time defending champion but lost in the final to Andy Murray in straight sets, resulting in his dropping out of the top five for the first time since 2005.[147][148] He then lost in the quarterfinals of the Rome Masters to Stan Wawrinka in straight sets.[149]

Nadal lost to eventual runner-up Djokovic in the quarterfinals of the French Open, ending his winning streak of 39 consecutive victories in Paris since his defeat by Robin Söderling in 2009.[150] Nadal went on to win the 2015 Mercedes Cup against Serbian Viktor Troicki, his first grass court title since he won at Wimbledon in 2010.[151] He was unable to continue his good form on grass as he lost in the first round of the Aegon Championships to Alexandr Dolgopolov in three sets.[152] Nadal's struggles continued when he lost in the second round of Wimbledon to Dustin Brown.[153]

In the third round of the 2015 US Open, Nadal once again lost to Fognini, despite having won the first two sets.[154] This early exit ended Nadal's record 10-year streak of winning at least one major.

2016: Second Olympic gold medal
Main article: 2016 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Nadal started the year winning Mubadala Title defeating Milos Raonic in straight sets. After that, he entered the Doha, Qatar, where he reached the finals, losing to Djokovic in straight sets. This was their 47th match, after which Djokovic led their head-to-head rivalry with 24 matches won. At the Australian Open, Nadal was defeated in five sets by compatriot Fernando Verdasco in the first round. The defeat marked his first opening round exit at the Australian Open.[155]


Nadal at the 2016 US Open
In April he won his 28th Masters 1000 in Monte Carlo.[156] He went on to win his 17th ATP 500 in Barcelona, winning the trophy for the ninth time in his career.[157] He continued the clay court season in Madrid, falling to Murray in the semifinal.[158]

The following week, Nadal played in Rome Masters where he reached the quarterfinal. Nadal was again defeated by Djokovic in straight sets, although he had a break advantage in both sets and served to win the second.[159]

Following Federer's withdrawal due to injury, Nadal was named the fourth seed at Roland Garros.[160] On 26 May, he became the eighth male player in tennis history to record 200 Grand Slam match wins, as he defeated Facundo Bagnis in straight sets in the second round of the Slam.[161] Following the victory, however, Nadal had to withdraw from competition owing to a left wrist injury initially suffered during the Madrid Open,[162] handing Marcel Granollers a walk-over into the fourth round.[163] On 9 June, Nadal announced that the same wrist injury that forced him to withdraw from the French Open needed more time to heal, and that he would not play at the 2016 Wimbledon Championships.[164] At the Rio 2016 Olympics, Nadal achieved 800 career wins with his quarterfinal victory over the Brazilian Thomaz Bellucci. Partnering Marc López, he won the gold medal in men's doubles event for Spain by defeating Romania's Florin Mergea and Horia Tecau in the finals.[165] This made Nadal the second man in the open era to have won gold medals in both singles and doubles. Nadal also advanced to the bronze medal match in the men's singles but was defeated by Kei Nishikori.

At the US Open Nadal was seeded #4 and advanced to the fourth round but was defeated by 24th seed Lucas Pouille in 5 sets. The defeat meant that 2016 was the first year since 2004 in which Nadal had failed to reach a Grand Slam quarter-final.[166]

He played the Shanghai Masters and was upset in the second round by Viktor Troicki. He subsequently ended his 2016 season to let his wrist recover.

2017: French and US Open titles and year-end No.1
Main article: 2017 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Nadal opened his season by playing at the Brisbane International for the first time, where he reached the quarterfinals before losing to Milos Raonic in three sets.[167] In the second round of the tournament, he defeated Mischa Zverev for the loss of just two games;[168] Nadal began the Australian Open with straight-set wins over Florian Mayer and Marcos Baghdatis, before more difficult wins over Alexander Zverev and Gael Monfils, which set up his first quarterfinal berth at a Grand Slam since the 2015 French Open. Nadal defeated Raonic and Grigor Dimitrov in the quarterfinal and semifinal, respectively (the latter lasting for five sets over five hours), to set up a final against Roger Federer, his first Grand Slam final since he won the 2014 French Open. Nadal went on to lose to Federer in five sets; this was the first time that Nadal had lost to Federer in a Grand Slam since the final of the 2007 Wimbledon Championships.

Nadal made it to the final of Acapulco without dropping a set, but was defeated by big-serving Sam Querrey. In a rematch of the Australian Open final Nadal took on Roger Federer in the fourth round at Indian Wells but again lost to his old rival, this time in straight sets; it was their earliest meeting in a tournament in over a decade. In the Miami Masters, Nadal reached the final to again play Federer, and was once again defeated in straight sets.[169] Nadal then won his 29th Masters 1000 title in Monte Carlo; it was his tenth victory in the principality, the most wins by any player at a single tournament in the Open era.[170] Nadal won his 18th ATP 500 title in Barcelona without dropping a set, also marking his tenth victory in Barcelona.[171] Nadal next played in the Madrid Open, where he defeated Dominic Thiem to tie Novak Djokovic's all-time Masters record of 30 titles.[172]


Nadal at the 2017 French Open where he won his 10th French Open title
Nadal went on to beat Stan Wawrinka in straight sets and win a record tenth French Open title. This marked his first Grand Slam title since 2014, ending his three-year drought in Grand Slams.[173] Nadal won every set that he played in the tournament, dropping a total of only 35 games over his seven matches, which is the second-fewest by any male (second only to Björn Borg's 32 dropped games at the 1978 French Open) on the way to a title at a Grand Slam tournament in the Open era with all matches being best-of-five-sets.[citation needed] The achievement, called "La Décima" ("the tenth" in Spanish), made Nadal the first male or female in the Open era to win ten titles from a single Grand Slam tournament, following similar achievements in Monte Carlo and Barcelona. Nadal also climbed to second on the all-time Grand Slam titles list, with 15 grand slam championships, putting him one ahead of Pete Sampras.[174]

Nadal lost in the round of 16 at Wimbledon, 13–15 in the fifth set, to Gilles Müller.[175] He returned to competition in Montreal. He won his first match against Coric in straight sets but fell in the Round of 16 to Canadian teenager Denis Shapovalov. By 21 August, he retook the ATP No. 1 ranking from Andy Murray. Nadal earned his third US Open title against first-time Grand Slam finalist Kevin Anderson, winning the final in straight sets. This marked the first time that Nadal had captured two Grand Slam tournaments in a year since 2013, and the second time since 2010. Nadal extended his winning streak by winning the China Open, winning the final against Nick Kyrgios in straight sets.[176]

After defeating Hyeon Chung in the second round of the Paris Masters Nadal secured the year end number one. He became year end number one for the fourth time in his career, tying him for fourth all-time with Novak Djokovic, Ivan Lendl and John McEnroe, behind Pete Sampras (6), and Roger Federer and Jimmy Connors with 5.

By securing year end number one, Nadal broke a number of historical records:[177]

At the age of 31, he was the oldest person to finish as year end number one.
He was the first aged over 30 to finish as year end number one.
Nadal became the first player to hold, lose and regain the year-end No. 1 on three occasions (no one else has done it twice).
He was the first player to finish No. 1 four times in non-consecutive years.
He was the first to finish in the top spot four years since he last achieved the feat.
The nine-year gap between his first year-end No. 1 season (2008) and his last (2017) was a record as well.
2018: 11th French Open title
Main article: 2018 Rafael Nadal tennis season
Nadal began his 2018 season at the Kooyong Classic, where he lost to Richard Gasquet in the first round. He then played at the Tie Break Tens exhibition tournament in Melbourne, beating Lucas Pouille and Lleyton Hewitt in the opening two rounds, before losing in the final to Tomáš Berdych. At the Australian Open, Nadal recorded straight-sets wins over Víctor Estrella Burgos, Leonardo Mayer and Damir Džumhur in the first three rounds, before notching a tougher four-set win against Diego Schwartzman in the fourth round. He faced Marin Cilic in the quarterfinal, but retired in the fifth set due to a hip injury.[178]

On 16 February, Nadal dropped to the No. 2 ranking after 26 weeks at the top when his rival Roger Federer overtook him in points. Bowing out in the quarterfinals of the Australian Open, Nadal had only defended 360 of the 1200 points he had won by reaching the final in 2017. At the same time, Federer successfully defended his title and left Australia only 155 points behind Nadal. Federer then won his third Rotterdam Open and collected enough points to overtake the No. 1 position.

Nadal withdrew from the Mexican Open, Indian Wells Masters, and Miami Open due to an injury. Despite his absence in Miami, he regained the No. 1 ranking on 2 April due to Federer's second-round loss.

After recovering from his hip injury, Nadal helped secure the Spanish Davis Cup team a victory over Germany in the quarterfinal of the World Group. He beat Philipp Kohlschreiber and Alexander Zverev in straight sets.[179]

At the Monte Carlo Masters, Nadal successfully defended his title and won a record-breaking 31st Masters title, thus becoming the player with the most Masters 1000 titles in tennis history. It also marked his 11th title in Monte Carlo, as well as the 76th title in his career. Because he defended the points won the previous year, he kept his no. 1 ranking and began his 171st week as the world number 1.[180] Nadal won in Monte Carlo without dropping a set, beating Kei Nishikori in the final.

Nadal went on to win his 11th title in Barcelona, defeating Stefanos Tsitsipas in straight sets, becoming the first player in the open era to win 400 matches on both clay and hard.[181][182] The win marked his 20th ATP 500 series title, which put him back atop the list of most ATP 500 titles, tied with Roger Federer. It also marked his 14th consecutive season with at least one ATP 500 title.

Fresh after achieving the 'Undecima' at Monte Carlo and Barcelona, Nadal had to defend yet another title at Madrid if he were to retain his No. 1 ranking, with the tournament taking place on his home soil. He reached the quarterfinals, defeating Gael Monfils and Diego Schwartzman in straight sets, to extend his record to 50 consecutive sets won on clay, starting from the 2017 French Open. His win over Schwartzman broke John McEnroe's record of 49 straight sets won on a single surface.[183] McEnroe had previously achieved the record on carpet in 1984. In a surprise, Nadal lost in straight sets to Dominic Thiem in the quarterfinals, ending his 21-match and record 50-set winning streaks on clay. He also relinquished his world no. 1 ranking to Federer in the process.

At the Rome Masters, Nadal captured his 8th title in the Italian capital as well as his 78th career title, defeating Alexander Zverev in three sets, thus overtaking John McEnroe in the fourth place on the list of most titles won in the Open Era.[184] It was Nadal's 32nd Masters title - most of any player in the Open Era. With his victory in Rome, Nadal also regained the no. 1 spot from Federer. Also In the semifinals, he faced his arch-rival Novak Djokovic for the record 51st time, beating him in two sets after a tight first set tiebreak.

Then at the French Open, Nadal won his 17th Grand Slam title. This tied Margaret Court‘s record for singles titles at a Grand Slam event (Court won 11 Australian Opens, but seven came when it was the Australian Championships, an amateur event). En route to the title, Nadal dropped only one set, beating Dominic Thiem in the final in three sets.[185] Nadal became just the fourth man in the Open Era to win three or more major titles after turning 30. It is an exclusive club that also includes Federer, Rod Laver and Ken Rosewall.

Going into Wimbledon, Nadal was ranked world number one, but was seeded second due to Wimbledon's seeding algorithm. En route to the quarterfinals, he defeated Dudi Sela, Mikhail Kukushkin, Alex De Minaur, and Jirí Veselý without dropping a set. He then faced #5 seed Juan Martín del Potro, who he defeated in five sets. In the semifinals he faced long-time rival Novak Djokovic, who was aiming to reach his first major final since the 2016 US Open. This match lasted 5 hours and 17 minutes, spread over two days, becoming the second-longest Wimbledon semifinal in history, second only to the match between Kevin Anderson and John Isner held earlier on the same day. Djokovic defeated Nadal in five sets with the fifth set being 10–8.[186] This was Nadal's first defeat in the semifinals of a major since the 2009 US Open, and his first ever defeat in the semifinals of Wimbledon. Despite this, Nadal achieved his best results at Wimbledon since 2011. This performance, combined with Roger Federer's unsuccessful title defense, ensured that Nadal retained the world number one ranking after the grass season.

At the Rogers Cup, Nadal defeated Benoît Paire, Stan Wawrinka, sixth seed Marin Cilic in the quarterfinals, Karen Khachanov in the semifinals, and Stefanos Tsitsipas in the final to win a record-extending 33rd Masters 1000 title.[187] This was Nadal's first Masters 1000 title win on hard court since 2013. He then withdrew from the Cincinnati Masters to prepare for the US Open.

Nadal was the top seed during his title defense at the US Open. He first faced David Ferrer in Ferrer's last Grand Slam match, who retired due to injury during the second set. He then defeated Vasek Pospisil in the second round, Karen Khachanov in four close sets in the third, and Nikoloz Basilashvili in the fourth. In the quarterfinals, he faced ninth seed Dominic Thiem in their first ever match on a surface other than clay. Nadal lost the first set 0-6, but took control in the second and third, winning both after breaking Thiem as he attempted to serve for the third set. Nadal came back from a break down to force a fourth set tiebreaker, which Thiem narrowly won. In the fifth set, Nadal was unable to convert three break points at 5-5 which would have allowed him to serve for the match. He was able to win the match 7-5 in the tiebreaker at 2:04 am local time, after 4 hours and 49 minutes. In his semi-final matchup against Juan Martin del Potro, Nadal retired after losing the second set 6-2 due to knee pain.

On October 31, he announced his withdrawal from the Paris Masters due to an abdominal injury and as a result Novak Djokovic will replace him as World #1. [188]

Rivalries
See also: Big Four (tennis)
Nadal vs. Federer
Main article: Federer–Nadal rivalry
Roger Federer and Nadal have been playing each other since 2004, and their rivalry is a significant part of both men's careers.[49][189][190] They held the top two rankings on the ATP Tour from July 2005 until 14 August 2009, when Nadal fell to No. 3 (Andy Murray became the new No. 2),[191] and again since 11 September 2017. They are the only pair of men to have ever finished four consecutive calendar years at the top.[192][193] Nadal ascended to No. 2 in July 2005 and held this spot for a record 160 consecutive weeks before surpassing Federer in August 2008.[194]

They have played 38 times, and Nadal leads their head-to-head series 23–15 overall and 9–3 in Grand Slam tournaments. Nadal has a winning record on clay (13–2) and outdoor hard courts (8–5) while Federer leads the indoor hard courts by 6–1 and grass by 2–1.[195]

As tournament seedings are based on rankings, 24 of their matches have been in tournament finals, including an all-time record nine Grand Slam tournament finals.[196] From 2006 to 2008, they played in every French Open and Wimbledon final, and also met in the title match of the 2009 Australian Open, the 2011 French Open and the 2017 Australian Open.[196] Nadal won six of the nine, losing the first two Wimbledon finals. Four of these matches were five-set matches (2007 and 2008 Wimbledon, 2009 and 2017 Australian Open), and the 2008 Wimbledon final has been lauded as the greatest match ever by many long-time tennis analysts.[50][197][198][199] Nadal is the only player who has competed and won against Federer in the final of a Grand Slam on all three surfaces (grass, hard, and clay).

Nadal vs. Djokovic
Main article: Djokovic–Nadal rivalry
Novak Djokovic and Nadal have met 52 times (more than any other pair in the Open Era) and Nadal trails at 25–27.[121][200][201] Nadal leads on clay 16–7, while Djokovic leads on hard courts 18–7, and they are tied on grass 2–2.[121][201] In 2009, this rivalry was listed as the third greatest of the previous 10 years by ATPworldtour.com.[202] Djokovic is one of only two players to have at least ten match wins against Nadal (the other being Federer) and the only person to defeat Nadal seven consecutive times, and two times consecutively on clay. The two earlier shared the record for the longest match played in a best of three sets (4 hours and 3 minutes) at the 2009 Mutua Madrid Open semifinals until the match between Roger Federer and Juan Martín del Potro in the London 2012 Olympics Semifinal, which lasted 4 hours and 26 minutes.[203][204] They have also played in a record 12 Masters Series finals.

In the 2011 Wimbledon final, Djokovic won in four sets for his first Grand Slam final over Nadal.[205] Djokovic also defeated Nadal in the 2011 US Open Final. In 2012, Djokovic defeated Nadal in the Australian Open final for a third consecutive Grand Slam final win over Nadal. This is the longest Grand Slam tournament final in Open era history at 5 hours, 53 minutes.[206] Nadal won their last three 2012 meetings in the final of the Monte Carlo Masters, Rome Masters and French Open in April, May, and June 2012, respectively.[207] In 2013, Djokovic defeated Nadal in straight sets in the final at Monte Carlo, ending Nadal's record eight consecutive titles there, but Nadal got revenge at the French Open in an epic five-setter 9–7 in the fifth. In August 2013, Nadal won in Montreal, denying Djokovic his fourth Rogers Cup title.[121] Nadal also defeated Djokovic in the 2013 US Open Final. In their third clash of 2014 Nadal defeated Djokovic in the 2014 French Open final. Since the 2014 French Open Final, Djokovic has won seven consecutive meetings including a win in straight sets in the quarterfinals of the 2015 French Open which ended Nadal's 39-match win streak at Roland Garros and an opportunity for a sixth consecutive title, with Djokovic becoming only the second player after Robin Söderling to defeat Nadal at the event. Nadal easily defeated Djokovic in the 2017 Madrid Open semifinals (6–2, 6–4), his first victory against the Serb since the 2014 French Open. When they next met Nadal beat Djokovic again, this time on clay in the 2018 Rome semifinals, 7-6(4), 6-3. Their most recent encounter was in the 2018 Wimbledon semifinals, where Djokovic finally emerged victorious after an over-5-hour battle that was spread over two days and went to 10-8 in the fifth set.

Nadal vs. Murray

Nadal and Murray in Tokyo
Nadal and Andy Murray have met on 24 occasions since 2007, with Nadal leading 17–7. Nadal leads 7–2 on clay, 3–0 on grass, and 7–5 on hard courts (including 4–4 on outdoor courts, but Nadal leads 3–1 on indoor hard courts), but trails 1–3 in finals. The pair once met regularly at Grand Slam level, with nine out of their 23 meetings coming in Grand Slams, with Nadal leading 7–2 (3–0 at Wimbledon, 2–0 at the French Open, 1–1 at the Australian Open, and 1–1 at the US Open).[208] Seven of these nine appearances have been in quarterfinals and semifinals, making the rivalry an important part of both men's careers. Nadal defeated Murray in three consecutive Grand Slam semifinals in 2011 from the French Open to the US Open. They have never met in a Grand Slam final, but Murray leads 3–1 in ATP finals, with Nadal winning at Indian Wells in 2009[209] and Murray winning in Rotterdam the same year,[210] Tokyo[211] in 2011, and Madrid in 2015.

Nadal vs. Wawrinka
Nadal and Stan Wawrinka have met 20 times, with Nadal leading 17–3 (85%). Although this rivalry has less significance than rivalries with the other members of the Big Four, the pair have met in several prestigious tournaments. The rivalry saw Nadal winning the first 12 encounters, all in straight sets, including 2 finals, one of which is a Masters 1000 final at Madrid in 2013. However, since Wawrinka's breakthrough season in 2013 the pair has won an almost equal number of matches against each other (3–4) from 2014 onward.[212] Wawrinka scored his first win against Nadal in their most important encounter, the 2014 Australian Open final in 4 sets, denying Nadal's double career slam. It was also the only match between the pair not resulting in a straight set win for either player. Nadal won their second Grand Slam final, at the 2017 French Open.[213]

Legacy
Nadal stands alone in the Open Era as the player with the most clay court titles (57), and holds an all-time record of 11 Roland Garros, 11 Monte-Carlo Masters and 11 Barcelona titles. He also stands alone with the longest single surface win streak (clay courts, 81) in the history of the Open Era. Due to these achievements, many have called Nadal "The King of Clay",[a] and he is widely regarded as the greatest clay-court player in history.[b] His evolution into an all-court champion has established him as one of the best players of all time.[c]

Playing style and coaching
Nadal's playing style and personality can be summarised by Jimmy Connors: "He's built out of a mold that I think I came from also, that you walk out there, you give everything you have from the very first point to the end no matter what the score. And you're willing to lay it all out on the line and you're not afraid to let the people see that."

Nadal generally plays an aggressive, behind-the-baseline game founded on heavy topspin groundstrokes, consistency, speedy footwork and tenacious court coverage, thus making him an aggressive counterpuncher.[244] Known for his athleticism and speed around the court, Nadal is an excellent defender[245] who hits well on the run, constructing winning plays from seemingly defensive positions. He also plays very fine dropshots, which work especially well because his heavy topspin often forces opponents to the back of the court.[246]


Nadal at the Monte Carlo Masters in 2007
Nadal employs a semi-western grip forehand, often with a "lasso-whip" follow-through, where his left arm hits through the ball and finishes above his left shoulder – as opposed to a more traditional finish across the body or around his opposite shoulder.[247][248] Nadal's forehand groundstroke form allows him to hit shots with heavy topspin – more so than many of his contemporaries.[249]

San Francisco tennis researcher John Yandell used a high-speed video camera and special software to count the average number of revolutions of a tennis ball hit full force by Nadal. Yandell concluded:

The first guys we did were Sampras and Agassi. They were hitting forehands that in general were spinning about 1,800 to 1,900 revolutions per minute. Federer is hitting with an amazing amount of spin, too, right? 2,700 revolutions per minute. Well, we measured one forehand Nadal hit at 4,900. His average was 3,200.[250]

While Nadal's shots tend to land short of the baseline, the characteristically high bounces his forehands achieve tend to mitigate the advantage an opponent would normally gain from capitalizing on a short ball.[251] Although his forehand is based on heavy topspin, he can hit the ball deep and flat with a more orthodox follow through for clean winners.

Nadal's serve was initially considered a weak point in his game, although his improvements in both first-serve points won and break points saved since 2005 have allowed him to consistently compete for and win major titles on faster surfaces. Nadal relies on the consistency of his serve to gain a strategic advantage in points, rather than going for service winners.[252] However, before the 2010 US Open, he altered his service motion, arriving in the trophy pose earlier and pulling the racket lower during the trophy pose. Before the 2010 U.S. Open, Nadal modified his service grip to a more continental one. These two changes in his serve increased his average speed by around 10 mph during the 2010 US Open, maxing out at 135 mph (217 km), allowing him to win more free points on his serve.[253] However, since the 2010 US Open, Nadal's serve speed has dropped to previous levels and has again been cited as a need for improvement.[254][255][256]

Nadal is a clay court specialist in the sense that he has been extremely successful on that surface. He has won eleven times at Roland Garros, eleven times at Monte Carlo, eleven times at Barcelona and seven at Rome. However, Nadal has shed that label owing to his success on other surfaces, including holding simultaneous Grand Slam tournament titles on grass, hard courts, and clay on two separate occasions, winning eight Masters series titles on hardcourt, and winning the Olympic gold medal on hardcourt.[244][257]

Despite praise for Nadal's talent and skill, some have questioned his longevity in the sport, citing his build and playing style as conducive to injury.[258] Nadal himself has admitted to the physical toll hard courts place on ATP Tour players, calling for a reevaluated tour schedule featuring fewer hard court tournaments.[259]

Nadal has had several coaches throughout his career. Toni Nadal coached him from 1990–2017.[260] He is currently being coached by Francisco Roig (2005–)[261] and Carlos Moyá (2016–).[262]

Public image
Equipment and endorsements

Nike sleeveless shirt, matching headband and wrist bands, and Babolat AeroPro Drive GT raquette at Roland Garros 2007
Nadal has been sponsored by Kia Motors since 2006. He has appeared in advertising campaigns for Kia as a global ambassador for the company. In May 2008, Kia released a claymation viral ad featuring Nadal in a tennis match with an alien.[263] In May 2015, Nadal extended his partnership with Kia for another five years.[264]

Nike serves as Nadal's clothing and shoe sponsor. Nadal's signature on-court attire entailed a variety of sleeveless shirts paired with 3/4 length capri pants.[265] For the 2009 season, Nadal adopted more-traditional on-court apparel. Nike encouraged Nadal to update his look in order to reflect his new status as the sport's top player at that time[266] and associate Nadal with a style that, while less distinctive than his "pirate" look, would be more widely emulated by consumers.[267][268] At warmup tournaments in Abu Dhabi and Doha, Nadal played matches in a polo shirt specifically designed for him by Nike,[269] paired with shorts cut above the knee. Nadal's new, more conventional style carried over to the 2009 Australian Open, where he was outfitted with Nike's Bold Crew Men's Tee[270] and Nadal Long Check Shorts.[271][272][273] Nadal wears Nike's Air CourtBallistec 2.3 tennis shoes,[274] bearing various customizations throughout the season, including his nickname "Rafa" on the right shoe and a stylized bull logo on the left.

He became the face of Lanvin's L'Homme Sport cologne in April 2009.[275] Nadal uses an AeroPro Drive racquet with a 41/4-inch L2 grip. As of the 2010 season, Nadal's racquets are painted to resemble the new Babolat AeroPro Drive with Cortex GT racquet in order to market a current model which Babolat sells.[276][277] Nadal uses no replacement grip, and instead wraps two overgrips around the handle. He used Duralast 15L strings until the 2010 season, when he switched to Babolat's new, black-colored, RPM Blast string. Nadal's rackets are always strung at 55 lb (25 kg), regardless of which surface or conditions he is playing on.[citation needed]

As of January 2010, Nadal is the international ambassador for Quely, a company from his native Mallorca that manufactures biscuits, bakery and chocolate-coated products; he has consumed their products ever since he was a young child.[278]

In 2010, luxury watchmaker Richard Mille announced that he had developed an ultra-light wristwatch in collaboration with Nadal called the Richard Mille RM027 Tourbillon watch.[279] The watch is made of titanium and lithium and is valued at US$525,000; Nadal was involved in the design and testing of the watch on the tennis court.[279] During the 2010 French Open, Men's Fitness reported that Nadal wore the Richard Mille watch on the court as part of a sponsorship deal with the Swiss watchmaker.[280]

Nadal replaced Cristiano Ronaldo as the new face of Emporio Armani Underwear and Armani Jeans for the spring/summer 2011 collection.[281] This was the first time that the label has chosen a tennis player for the job; association football has ruled lately prior to Ronaldo, David Beckham graced the ads since 2008.[282] Armani said that he selected Nadal as his latest male underwear model because "...he is ideal as he represents a healthy and positive model for youngsters".[281]

In June 2012, Nadal joined the group of sports endorsers of the PokerStars online poker cardroom.[283] Nadal won a charity poker tournament against retired Brazilian football player Ronaldo in 2014.[284]

Court name
In April 2017, the centre court of the Barcelona Open was named pista Rafa Nadal.[285]

In popular culture
In February 2010, Rafael Nadal was featured in the music video of Shakira's "Gypsy".[286] and part of her album release She Wolf. In explaining why she chose Nadal for the video, Shakira was quoted as saying in an interview with the Latin American Herald Tribune: "I thought that maybe I needed someone I could in some way identify with. And Rafael Nadal is a person who has been totally committed to his career since he was very young. Since he was 17, I believe."[287][288]

Asteroid
128036 Rafaelnadal is a main belt asteroid discovered in 2003 at the Observatorio Astronómico de Mallorca and named after Nadal.[289]

Off the court
Involvement in football
Nadal is an avid fan of association football club Real Madrid. On 8 July 2010, it was reported that he had become a shareholder of RCD Mallorca, his local club by birth, in an attempt to assist the club from debt.[290] Nadal reportedly owns 10 percent and was offered the role of vice president, which he rejected.[291] His uncle Miguel Ángel Nadal became assistant coach under Michael Laudrup. Nadal remains a passionate Real Madrid supporter; ESPN.com writer Graham Hunter wrote, "He's as Merengue as [Real Madrid icons] Raúl, Iker Casillas and Alfredo Di Stéfano."

Shortly after acquiring his interest in Mallorca, Nadal called out UEFA for apparent hypocrisy in ejecting the club from the 2010–11 UEFA Europa League for excessive debts, saying through a club spokesperson, "Well, if those are the criteria upon which UEFA is operating, then European competition will only comprise two or three clubs because all the rest are in debt, too."[292]

He is a fervent supporter of the Spanish national team, and he was one of six people not affiliated with the team or the national federation allowed to enter the team's locker room following Spain's victory in the 2010 FIFA World Cup Final.[292]

Philanthropy
Nadal took part in Thailand's "A Million Trees for the King" project, planting a tree in honour of King Bhumibol Adulyadej on a visit to Hua Hin during his Thailand Open 2010. "For me it's an honour to be part of this project", said Nadal. "It's a very good project. I want to congratulate the Thai people and congratulate the King for this unbelievable day. I wish all the best for this idea. It's very, very nice."[293]

Fundación Rafa Nadal
The creation of the Fundación Rafa Nadal took place in November 2007, and its official presentation was in February 2008, at the Manacor Tennis Club in Mallorca, Spain. The foundation will focus on social work and development aid particularly on childhood and youth.[294] On deciding why to start a foundation, Nadal said "This can be the beginning of my future, when I retire and have more time, [...] I am doing very well and I owe society, [...] A month-and-a-half ago I was in Chennai, in India. The truth is we live great here....I can contribute something with my image..." Nadal was inspired by the Red Cross benefit match against malaria with Real Madrid goalkeeper Iker Casillas, recalling, "We raised an amount of money that we would never have imagined. I have to thank Iker, my project partner, who went all out for it, [...] That is why the time has come to set up my own foundation and determine the destination of the money."

Nadal's mother, Ana Maria Parera, chairs the charitable organization and father Sebastian is vice-chairman. Coach and uncle Toni Nadal and his agent, former tennis player Carlos Costa, are also involved. Roger Federer has given Nadal advice on getting involved in philanthropy. Despite the fact that poverty in India struck him particularly hard, Nadal wants to start by helping "people close by, in the Balearic Islands, in Spain, and then, if possible, abroad".[295]

On 16 October 2010, Nadal traveled to India for the first time to visit his tennis academy for underprivileged children at Anantapur Sports Village, in the Anantapur City, Andhra Pradesh. His foundation has also worked in the Anantapur Educational Center project, in collaboration with the Vicente Ferrer Foundation.[296][297]

Personal life
Nadal lived with his parents and younger sister Maria Isabel in a five-story apartment building in their hometown of Manacor, Mallorca. In June 2009, Spanish newspaper La Vanguardia, and then The New York Times, reported that his parents, Ana Maria and Sebastian, had separated. This news came after weeks of speculation in Internet posts and message boards over Nadal's personal issues as the cause of his setback.[298]
Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar (/?s?t??n t?n'du?lk?r/ (About this soundlisten); born 24 April 1973) is a former Indian international cricketer and a former captain of the Indian national team, regarded as one of the greatest batsmen of all time.[4] He is the highest run scorer of all time in International cricket. Tendulkar took up cricket at the age of eleven, made his Test debut on 15 November 1989 against Pakistan in Karachi at the age of sixteen, and went on to represent Mumbai domestically and India internationally for close to twenty-four years. He is the only player to have scored one hundred international centuries, the first batsman to score a double century in a ODI, the holder of the record for the most number of runs in both Test and ODI, and the only player to complete more than 30,000 runs in international cricket.[5] He is colloquially known as Little Master or Master Blaster,[6][7][8][9] and often referred to as the God of Cricket by Indian cricket followers.[10][11] Despite his reputation, he is known for his modesty and humility, once stating "I am not the God of cricket. I make mistakes, God doesn’t".[12]

In 2001, Sachin Tendulkar became the first batsman to complete 10,000 ODI runs in his 259 innings.[13] In 2002, halfway through his career, Wisden Cricketers' Almanack ranked him the second greatest Test batsman of all time, behind Don Bradman, and the second greatest ODI batsman of all time, behind Viv Richards.[14] Later in his career, Tendulkar was a part of the Indian team that won the 2011 World Cup, his first win in six World Cup appearances for India.[15] He had previously been named "Player of the Tournament" at the 2003 edition of the tournament, held in South Africa. In 2013, he was the only Indian cricketer included in an all-time Test World XI named to mark the 150th anniversary of Wisden Cricketers' Almanack.[16][17][18]

Tendulkar received the Arjuna Award in 1994 for his outstanding sporting achievement, the Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna award in 1997, India's highest sporting honour, and the Padma Shri and Padma Vibhushan awards in 1999 and 2008, respectively, India's fourth and second highest civilian awards.[19] After a few hours of his final match on 16 November 2013, the Prime Minister's Office announced the decision to award him the Bharat Ratna, India's highest civilian award.[20][21] He is the youngest recipient to date and the first ever sportsperson to receive the award.[22][23] He also won the 2010 Sir Garfield Sobers Trophy for cricketer of the year at the ICC awards.[24] In 2012, Tendulkar was nominated to the Rajya Sabha, the upper house of the Parliament of India.[25] He was also the first sportsperson and the first person without an aviation background to be awarded the honorary rank of group captain by the Indian Air Force.[26] In 2012, he was named an Honorary Member of the Order of Australia.[27][28]

In 2010, Time magazine included Sachin in its annual Time 100 list as one of the "Most Influential People in the World".[29] In December 2012, Tendulkar announced his retirement from ODIs.[30] He retired from Twenty20 cricket in October 2013[31] and subsequently retired from all forms of cricket on 16 November 2013 after playing his 200th Test match, against the West Indies in Mumbai's Wankhede Stadium.[32] Tendulkar played 664 international cricket matches in total, scoring 34,357 runs.[5]


Contents
1	Early years
2	Early domestic career
2.1	Yorkshire
3	International career
3.1	Early career
3.2	Rise through the ranks
3.3	Captaincy
3.4	Mike Denness incident
3.5	Injuries and decline amid surpassing Bradman's haul
3.6	Decline phase of career
3.7	2003 Cricket World Cup
3.8	2003 Tour of Australia
3.9	2007 Cricket World Cup
3.10	Return to old form and consistency
3.11	2007–08 tour of Australia
3.12	Home series against South Africa
3.13	Sri Lanka Series
3.14	Return to form and breaking Brian Lara's record
3.15	ODI and Test Series against England
3.16	2009–2010
3.17	2011 World Cup and after
3.17.1	100th international century
3.17.2	Return To Ranji Trophy
3.18	Retirement
4	Indian Premier League and Champions League
5	Playing style
6	Fan following
7	Achievements and awards
7.1	National honours
7.2	Other honours
8	Personal life
8.1	Family
8.2	Beliefs
8.3	Business interests
8.4	Commercial endorsements
8.5	Rajya Sabha nomination
8.6	Philanthropy
8.7	Autobiography
9	Biographies
9.1	Books
9.2	Films
10	See also
11	Notes
12	References
13	External links
Early years
Tendulkar was born at Nirmal Nursing Home in Dadar, Bombay on 24 April 1973[citation needed] to a Maharashtrian[33][34] Rajapur Saraswat Brahmin family.[35] His father, Ramesh Tendulkar, was a well-known Marathi novelist & poet and his mother, Rajni, worked in the insurance industry.[36] Ramesh named Tendulkar after his favourite music director, Sachin Dev Burman. Tendulkar has three elder siblings: two half-brothers Nitin and Ajit, and a half-sister Savita. They were Ramesh's children by his first wife, who died after the birth of her third child.[citation needed][37]

Tendulkar spent his formative years in the Sahitya Sahawas Cooperative Housing Society in Bandra (East). As a young boy, Tendulkar was considered a bully, and often picked up fights with new children in his school.[38] He also showed an interest in tennis, idolising John McEnroe.[39] To help curb his mischievous and bullying tendencies, Ajit introduced the young Sachin to cricket in 1984. He introduced him to Ramakant Achrekar, a famous cricket coach and a club cricketer of repute, at Shivaji Park, Dadar. In the first meeting, the young Sachin did not play his best. Ajit told Achrekar that he was feeling self-conscious due to the coach observing him, and was not displaying his natural game. Ajit requested the coach to give him another chance at playing, but watch while hiding behind a tree. This time, Sachin, apparently unobserved, played much better and was accepted at Achrekar's academy.[citation needed]

Achrekar was impressed with Tendulkar's talent and advised him to shift his schooling to Sharadashram Vidyamandir (English) High School,[1] a school at Dadar which had a dominant cricket team and had produced many notable cricketers. Prior to this, Tendulkar had attended the Indian Education Society's New English School in Bandra (East).[40] He was also coached under the guidance of Achrekar at Shivaji Park in the mornings and evenings.[41] Tendulkar would practice for hours on end in the nets. If he became exhausted, Achrekar would put a one-rupee coin on the top of the stumps, and the bowler who dismissed Tendulkar would get the coin. If Tendulkar passed the whole session without getting dismissed, the coach would give him the coin. Tendulkar now considers the 13 coins he won then as some of his most prized possessions.[42] He moved in with his aunt and uncle, who lived near Shivaji Park, during this period, due to his hectic schedule.[40]


Sachin Tendulkar and his wife Anjali
Meanwhile, at school, he developed a reputation as a child prodigy. He had become a common conversation point in local cricketing circles, where there were suggestions already that he would become one of the greats. Sachin consistently featured in the school team in the Matunga Gujarati Seva Mandal (MGSM) Shield.[43] Besides school cricket, he also played club cricket, initially representing John Bright Cricket Club in Bombay's premier club cricket tournament, the Kanga League,[40] and later went on to play for the Cricket Club of India.[44] In 1987, at the age of 14, he attended the MRF Pace Foundation in Madras (now Chennai) to train as a fast bowler, but Australian fast bowler Dennis Lillee, who took a world record 355 Test wickets, was unimpressed, suggesting that Tendulkar focus on his batting instead.[45] On 20 January 1987, he also turned out as substitute for Imran Khan's side in an exhibition game at Brabourne Stadium in Bombay, to mark the golden jubilee of Cricket Club of India.[46] A couple of months later, former Indian batsman Sunil Gavaskar gave him a pair of his own ultra light pads and consoled him to not get disheartened for not getting the Bombay Cricket Association's "Best junior cricket award" (He was 14 years that time). "It was the greatest source of encouragement for me," Tendulkar said nearly 20 years later after surpassing Gavaskar's world record of 34 Test centuries.[47][48] Sachin served as a ball boy in the 1987 Cricket World Cup when India played against England in the semifinal in Bombay.[49][50] In his season in 1988, Tendulkar scored a century in every innings he played. He was involved in an unbroken 664-run partnership in a Lord Harris Shield inter-school game against St. Xavier's High School in 1988 with his friend and teammate Vinod Kambli, who would also go on to represent India. The destructive pair reduced one bowler to tears and made the rest of the opposition unwilling to continue the game. Tendulkar scored 326 (not out) in this innings and scored over a thousand runs in the tournament.[51] This was a record partnership in any form of cricket until 2006, when it was broken by two under-13 batsmen in a match held at Hyderabad in India.[52]

Early domestic career
On 14 November 1987, Tendulkar was selected to represent Bombay in the Ranji Trophy, India's premier domestic First-class cricket tournament, for the 1987–88 season. However, he was not selected for the final eleven in any of the matches, though he was often used as a substitute fielder.[40] He narrowly missed out on playing alongside his idol Gavaskar, who had retired from all forms of cricket after the 1987 Cricket World Cup.[40] A year later, on 11 December 1988, aged 15 years and 232 days, Tendulkar made his debut for Bombay against Gujarat at home and scored 100 not out in that match, making him the youngest Indian to score a century on debut in first-class cricket.[53] He was handpicked to play for the team by the then Bombay captain Dilip Vengsarkar after watching him easily negotiating India's best fast bowler at the time, Kapil Dev, in the Wankhede Stadium nets,[1] where the Indian team had come to play against the touring New Zealand team. He followed this by scoring a century in his first Deodhar and Duleep Trophies, which are also Indian domestic tournaments.[54]

Tendulkar finished the 1988–89 Raji Trophy season as Bombay's highest run-scorer. He scored 583 runs at an average of 67.77, and was the eighth highest run-scorer overall.[55] He also made an unbeaten century in the Irani Trophy match against Delhi at the start of the 1989–90 season, playing for the Rest of India.[56] Sachin was picked for a young Indian team to tour England twice, under the Star Cricket Club banner in 1988 and 1989.[57] In the famous 1990–91 Ranji Trophy final, in which Haryana defeated Bombay by two runs after leading in the first innings, Tendulkar's 96 from 75 deliveries was a key to giving Bombay a chance of victory as it attempted to chase 355 from only 70 overs on the final day.[58]

His first double century (204*) was for Mumbai while playing against the visiting Australian team at the Brabourne Stadium in 1998.[1][59] He is the only player to score a century on debut in all three of his domestic first-class tournaments (the Ranji, Irani, and Duleep Trophies).[60] Another double century was an innings of 233* against Tamil Nadu in the semi-finals of the 2000 Ranji Trophy, which he regards as one of the best innings of his career.[61][62][63]

Yorkshire
In 1992, at the age of 19, Tendulkar became the first overseas-born player to represent Yorkshire, which prior to Tendulkar joining the team, never selected players even from other English counties.[1][Note 1] Selected for Yorkshire as a replacement for the injured Australian fast bowler Craig McDermott, Tendulkar played 16 first-class matches for the county and scored 1070 runs at an average of 46.52.[64]

International career
Early career
Raj Singh Dungarpur is credited for the selection of Tendulkar for the Indian tour of Pakistan in late 1989,[65] after one first class season.[66] The Indian selection committee had shown interest in selecting Tendulkar for the tour of the West Indies held earlier that year, but eventually did not select him, as they did not want him to be exposed to the dominant fast bowlers of the West Indies so early in his career. Tendulkar made his Test debut against Pakistan in Karachi in November 1989 aged 16 years and 205 days. He made 15 runs, being bowled by Waqar Younis, who also made his debut in that match, but was noted for how he handled numerous blows to his body at the hands of the Pakistani pace attack.[67] In the fourth and final Test in Sialkot, he was hit on the nose by a bouncer bowled by Younis, but he declined medical assistance and continued to bat even as he gushed blood from it.[68] In a 20-over exhibition game in Peshawar, held in parallel with the bilateral series, Tendulkar made 53 runs off 18 balls, including an over in which he scored 27 runs (6, 4, 0, 6, 6, 6) off leg-spinner Abdul Qadir.[69] This was later called "one of the best innings I have seen" by the then Indian captain Krishnamachari Srikkanth.[70] In all, he scored 215 runs at an average of 35.83 in the Test series, and was dismissed without scoring a run in the only One Day International (ODI) he played.[71][72] Thus Sachin Tendulkar became the youngest player to debut for India in Tests at the age of 16 years and 205 days and also the youngest player to debut for India in ODIs at the age of 16 years and 238 days.[73][74]

The series was followed by a tour of New Zealand in which he scored 117 runs at an average of 29.25 in Tests including an innings of 88 in the second Test.[75] He was dismissed without scoring in one of the two one-day games he played, and scored 36 in the other.[76] On his next tour, a summer tour to England of 1990, on 14 August, he became the second youngest cricketer to score a Test century as he made 119 not out in the second Test at Old Trafford in Manchester, an innings which contributed to a draw and saved India from certain defeat in the match.[68] Wisden described his innings as "a disciplined display of immense maturity" and also wrote:[77]

He looked the embodiment of India's famous opener, Gavaskar, and indeed was wearing a pair of his pads. While he displayed a full repertoire of strokes in compiling his maiden Test hundred, most remarkable were his off-side shots from the back foot. Though only 5ft 5in tall, he was still able to control without difficulty short deliveries from the English pacemen.

Tendulkar further enhanced his reputation as a future great during the 1991–92 tour of Australia held before the 1992 Cricket World Cup, that included an unbeaten 148 in the third Test at Sydney, making him the youngest batsman to score a century in Australia. He then scored 114 on a fast, bouncing pitch in the final Test at Perth against a pace attack comprising Merv Hughes, Bruce Reid and Craig McDermott. Hughes commented to Allan Border at the time that "This little prick's going to get more runs than you, AB."[78]

Rise through the ranks
Tendulkar's performance through the years 1994–1999 coincided with his physical peak, in his early twenties. He opened the batting at Auckland against New Zealand in 1994, making 82 runs off 49 balls. He scored his first ODI century on 9 September 1994 against Australia in Sri Lanka at Colombo.[79][80] It took him 78 ODIs to score his first century.


Tendulkar waits at the bowler's end.
Tendulkar's rise continued when he was the leading run scorer at the 1996 World Cup, scoring two centuries.[81] He was the only Indian batsman to perform well in the semi-final against Sri Lanka. Tendulkar fell amid a batting collapse and the match referee, Clive Lloyd, awarded Sri Lanka the match after the crowd began rioting and throwing litter onto the field.[82]

After the World Cup, in the same year against Pakistan at Sharjah, Indian captain Mohammed Azharuddin was going through a lean patch. Tendulkar and Navjot Singh Sidhu both made centuries to set a then record partnership for the second wicket. After getting out, Tendulkar found Azharuddin in two minds about whether he should bat.[citation needed] Tendulkar convinced Azharuddin to bat and Azharuddin subsequently unleashed 24 runs off one over.[83] India went on to win that match. It enabled India to post a score in excess of 300 runs for the first time in an ODI.[84]

This was the beginning of a period at the top of the batting world, culminating in the Australian tour of India in early 1998, with Tendulkar scoring three consecutive centuries. The focus was on the clash between Tendulkar, the world's most dominating batsman and Shane Warne, the world's leading spinner, both at the peak of their careers, clashing in a Test series.[citation needed] In the lead-up to the series, Tendulkar simulated scenarios in the nets with Laxman Sivaramakrishnan, the former India leg spinner, donning the role of Warne.[citation needed] In their tour opener, Australia faced the then Ranji Champions Mumbai at the Brabourne Stadium in a three-day first class match.[85] Tendulkar made an unbeaten 204 as Shane Warne conceded 111 runs in 16 overs and Australia lost the match within three days.[86][87] He also had a role with the ball in the five-match ODI series in India following the Tests, including a five wicket haul in an ODI in Kochi. Set 310 runs to win, Australia were cruising at 203 for 3 in the 31st over when Tendulkar turned the match for India, taking the wickets of Michael Bevan, Steve Waugh, Darren Lehmann, Tom Moody and Damien Martyn for 32 runs in 10 overs.[88] The Test match success was followed by two consecutive centuries in April 1998 in a Triangular cricket tournament in Sharjah – the first in a must-win game to take India to the finals and then again in the finals, both against Australia. These twin knocks were also known as the Desert Storm innings.[89] Following the series, Warne ruefully joked that he was having nightmares about his Indian nemesis.[90]

Tendulkar's contribution in the ICC 1998 quarterfinal at Dhaka paved the way for India's entry into the semifinals, when he took four Australian wickets after scoring 141 runs in 128 balls.[91]

The inaugural Asian Test Championship took place in February and March 1999, involving India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka.[92] In the first match, between India and Pakistan in Eden Gardens, Tendulkar was run out for nine after colliding with Pakistan bowler Shoaib Akhtar. Around 100,000 people came to support India during the initial four days of the tournament, breaking a 63-year-old record for aggregate Test attendance record.[93] The crowd's reaction to Tendulkar's dismissal was to throw objects at Akhtar, and the players were taken off the field. The match resumed after Tendulkar and the president of the ICC appealed to the crowd; however, further rioting meant that the match was finished in front of a crowd of 200 people.[94] Tendulkar scored his 19th Test century in the second Test and the match resulted in a draw with Sri Lanka.[95] India did not progress to the final, which was won by Pakistan, and refused to participate the next time the championship was held due to increasing political tensions between India and Pakistan.[96]

In the Test against Pakistan at Chepauk in 1999, the first of a two-Test series, Sachin scored 136 in the fourth innings with India chasing 271 for victory. However, he was out when India needed 17 more runs to win, triggering a batting collapse, and India lost the match by 12 runs.[97] The worst was yet to come as Professor Ramesh Tendulkar, Sachin's father, died in the middle of the 1999 Cricket World Cup. Tendulkar flew back to India to attend the final rituals of his father, missing the match against Zimbabwe.[98] However, he returned to the World Cup scoring a century (140 not out off 101 balls) in his very next match against Kenya in Bristol. He dedicated this century to his father.[99]

Captaincy
Tendulkar's record as captain
 	Matches	Won	Lost	Drawn	Tied	No result	Win %
Test[100]	25	4	9	12	0	–	16%
ODI[101]	73	23	43	–	2	6	31.50%
Tendulkar's two tenures as captain of the Indian cricket team were not very successful. When Tendulkar took over as captain in 1996, it was with huge hopes and expectations. However, by 1997 the team was performing poorly. Azharuddin was credited with saying "Nahin jeetega! Chote ki naseeb main jeet nahin hai!",[102] which translates into: "He won't win! It's not in the small one's destiny!".[103]

Tendulkar, succeeding Azharuddin as captain for his second term, led India on a tour of Australia, where the visitors were beaten 3–0 by the newly crowned world champions.[104] Tendulkar, however, won the player of the series award[104] as well as player of the match in one of the games.[105] After another Test series defeat, this time by a 0–2 margin at home against South Africa, Tendulkar resigned, and Sourav Ganguly took over as captain in 2000.[106][107]

During the Indian team's 2007 tour of England, the desire of Rahul Dravid to resign from the captaincy became known. The BCCI President Sharad Pawar offered the captaincy to Tendulkar, who instead recommended Mahendra Singh Dhoni to take over the reins. Pawar later revealed this conversation, crediting Tendulkar for first forwarding the name of Dhoni, who since achieved much success as captain.[108]

Mike Denness incident
Main article: Mike Denness and Indian cricket team incident
In India's 2001 tour of South Africa in the second test match between India and South Africa at St George's Park, Port Elizabeth, match referee Mike Denness fined four Indian players for excessive appealing, as well as fined the Indian captain Sourav Ganguly for not controlling his team.[109] Tendulkar was given a suspended ban of one game by Denness in light of alleged ball tampering. Television cameras picked up images that suggested Tendulkar may have been involved in cleaning the seam of the cricket ball.[110] This can, under some conditions, amount to altering the condition of the ball. Denness found Sachin Tendulkar guilty of ball tampering charges and handed him a one Test match ban.[111] The incident escalated to include sports journalists accusing Denness of racism,[112] and led to Denness being barred from entering the venue of the third Test match. The ICC revoked the status of the match as a Test as the teams rejected the appointed referee.[113] The charges against Tendulkar and Sehwag's ban for excessive appealing triggered a massive backlash from the Indian public.[114]

Injuries and decline amid surpassing Bradman's haul
Sachin Tendulkar continued performing well in Test cricket in 2001 and 2002, with some pivotal performances with both bat and ball. Tendulkar took three wickets on the final day of the famous Kolkata Test against Australia in 2001. Tendulkar took the key wickets of Matthew Hayden and Adam Gilchrist, who were centurions in the previous Test. He also take a wicket of Shane Warne.This three wicket change the result of test match from draw to win of India.[115] In the five-match ODI series that followed, he took his 100th wicket in ODIs, claiming the wicket of then Australian captain Steve Waugh in the final match at the Fatorda Stadium in Goa.[116]

In the 2002 series in the West Indies, Tendulkar started well, scoring 79 in the first Test. In the second Test at Port of Spain, Sachin Tendulkar scored 117 in the first innings, his 29th Test century in his 93rd Test match, to equal Sir Donald Bradman's record of 29 Test hundreds.He was awarded by Sports car "Ferrari" by Michael Schumacher for achieving this feat.[117][118][119]

Decline phase of career
Then, in a hitherto unprecedented sequence, he scored 0, 0, 8 and 0 in the next four innings.[120] He returned to form in the last Test scoring 41 and 86, one half century. However, India lost the series.[121] In this period, in the third Test match against England in August 2002, Sachin scored his 30th Test century to surpass Bradman's haul, in his 99th Test match.[122][123]

2003 Cricket World Cup
Tendulkar made 673 runs in 11 matches in the 2003 Cricket World Cup,[124] helping India reach the final. While Australia retained the trophy that they had won in 1999, Tendulkar was given the Man of the Tournament award.[125][126]

He continued to score heavily in ODI cricket that year, with two hundreds in a tri-series involving New Zealand and Australia.[127][128] As a part-time bowler, he dismissed an exhausted centurion, Matthew Hayden in the tri-series final.[129]

2003 Tour of Australia
The drawn series as India toured Australia in 2003–04 saw Tendulkar making his mark in the last Test of the series, with 241 not out from 436 ball by 33 four at strike rate of 55.27 in Sydney, putting India in a virtually unbeatable position. He spend 613 minute at crease. India have a first inning score of 705/7. He followed up the innings with an unbeaten 60 in the second innings of the Test.[130] Prior to this Test match, he had had an unusually horrible run of form, failing in all six innings in the preceding three Tests.[citation needed] It was no aberration that 2003 was his worst year in Test cricket, with an average of 17.25 and just one fifty.[131][better source needed]

Tendulkar scored an unbeaten 194 against Pakistan at Multan in the following series. Indian captain Rahul Dravid declared before Tendulkar reached 200; had he done so it would have been the fourth time he had passed the landmark in Tests.[132] Tendulkar said that he was disappointed and that the declaration had taken him by surprise.[133] Many former cricketers commented that Dravid's declaration was in bad taste.[134][135] After the match, which India won, Dravid said that the matter had been discussed internally and put to rest.[136]

A tennis elbow injury then took its toll on Tendulkar, leaving him out of the side for most of the year, coming back only for the last two Tests when Australia toured India in 2004.[137][138] He played a part in India's victory in Mumbai in that series with a fast 55, though Australia took the series 2–1.[139]

On 10 December 2005 at Feroz Shah Kotla, Tendulkar scored his record-breaking 35th Test century, against the Sri Lankans. After this, Tendulkar endured the longest[needs update] spell of his career without a Test century: 17 innings elapsed before he scored 101 against Bangladesh in May 2007.[140] Tendulkar scored his 39th ODI hundred on 6 February 2006 in a match against Pakistan.[141] He followed with a 42 in the second One-Day International against Pakistan on 11 February 2006,[142] and then a 95 in hostile, seaming conditions on 13 February 2006 in Lahore, which set up an Indian victory.[143] On 19 March 2006, after being dismissed for only one run against England in the first innings of the third Test in his home ground, Wankhede, Tendulkar was booed off the ground by a section of the crowd,[144] the first time that he had ever faced such flak. Tendulkar ended the three-Test series without a half-century to his credit, and the need for a shoulder operation raised more questions about his longevity.[citation needed]

Tendulkar's comeback came in the DLF cup in Malaysia and he was the only Indian batsman to shine. In his comeback match, against West Indies on 14 September 2006, Tendulkar responded to his critics who believed that his career was inexorably sliding with his 40th ODI century.[citation needed] Though he scored 141 not out, West Indies won the rain-affected match by the D/L method.[145]

2007 Cricket World Cup
During the preparation for the 2007 World Cup, Tendulkar's attitude was criticised by Indian team coach Greg Chappell. Chappell reportedly felt that Tendulkar would be more useful down the order, while the latter felt that he would be better off opening the innings, the role he had played for most of his career.[146] Chappell also believed that Tendulkar's repeated failures were hurting the team's chances. In a rare show of emotion, Tendulkar hit out at the comments attributed to Chappell by pointing out that no coach had ever suggested his attitude towards cricket was incorrect. On 7 April 2007, the Board of Control for Cricket in India issued a notice to Tendulkar asking for an explanation for his comments made to the media.[147] Chappell subsequently resigned as coach but said that this affair had no bearing on his decision and that he and Tendulkar were on good terms.[146]

At the World Cup in the West Indies, Tendulkar and the Indian cricket team led by Rahul Dravid had a dismal campaign. Tendulkar, who was pushed to bat lower down the order had scores of 7 against Bangladesh, 57 not out against Bermuda and 0 against Sri Lanka.[citation needed] As a result, former Australian captain Ian Chappell, brother of Greg, called for Tendulkar to retire in his newspaper column.[148]

Return to old form and consistency
See also: List of batsmen who have scored over 10000 One Day International cricket runs
In the subsequent Test series against Bangladesh, Tendulkar returned to his opening slot and was chosen as the Man of the Series.[149] He continued by scoring 99 and 93 in the first two matches of the Future Cup against South Africa. During the second match, he also became the first to score 15,000 runs in ODIs.[150] He was the leading run scorer and was adjudged the Man of the Series.[151][152]


Tendulkar celebrates upon reaching his 38th Test century against Australia in the 2nd Test at the SCG in 2008, where he finished not out on 154
On the second day of the Nottingham Test on 28 July 2007, Tendulkar became the third cricketer to complete 11,000 Test runs.[153] In the subsequent one-day series against England, Tendulkar was the leading run scorer from India[154] with an average of 53.42. In the ODI Series against Australia in October 2007 Tendulkar was the leading Indian run scorer with 278 runs.[155]

Tendulkar was dismissed seven times in 2007 between 90 and 100, including three times at 99, leading some to suggestions that he struggles to cope with nervousness in this phase of his innings.[citation needed] Tendulkar has got out 27 times in the 90s during his international career.[156] In a five-ODI series against Pakistan, he was caught by Kamran Akmal off the bowling of Umar Gul for 99 in the second match at Mohali,[157] and in the fourth match of that series, he got out in the 90s for a second time, scoring 97 before dragging a delivery from Gul on to his stumps.[158]

2007–08 tour of Australia
In the Border-Gavaskar Trophy, 2007–08, Tendulkar showed exceptional form, becoming the leading run scorer with 493 runs in four Tests, despite consistently failing in the second innings.[159] Sachin scored 62 runs in the first innings of the first Test at the MCG in Melbourne, but could not prevent a heavy 337-run win for Australia.[160] In the controversial New Years' Test at Sydney, Tendulkar scored an unbeaten 154, even though India lost the Test. This was his third century at the SCG and his 38th Test century overall, earning him an average of 326 at the ground at the time of completing the innings.[161][162] In the third Test at the WACA cricket ground in Perth, Sachin was instrumental in India's first innings score of 330, scoring a well-compiled 71. India went on to record a historic triumph at the WACA, ending Australia's run of 16 consecutive wins.[163] In the fourth Test at the Adelaide Oval, which ended in a draw, he scored 153 in the first innings, being involved in a crucial 126 run stand with V.V.S. Laxman for the fifth wicket to lead India to a score of 282 for 5 from 156 for 4.[164] He secured the Man of the Match award.[165]

In the One-Day International Commonwealth Bank Tri-Series involving India, Sri Lanka and Australia, Tendulkar became the only batsman to complete 16,000 runs in ODIs.[166] He achieved this feat against Sri Lanka on 5 February 2008 at the Gabba in Brisbane. He started the series wth scores of 10, 35, 44 and 32.[167] His form dipped a bit in the middle of the tournament,[original research?] but Tendulkar came back strongly in India's must-win game against Sri Lanka at the Bellerive Oval in Hobart, scoring 63 off 54 balls.[168] He finished the series with a match winning 117 not out off 120 balls in the first final,[169] and 91 runs in the second final.[170]

Home series against South Africa
Sachin Tendulkar's Test cricket record[171]
 	Matches	Runs	Best	Average	100s	50s
Home	94	7216	217	52.67	22	32
Away	106	8705	248*	54.74	29	36
South Africa toured in March and April 2008 for a three-Test series. Tendulkar scored a five-ball duck in his only innings of the series;[172] he sustained a groin strain in the match and as a result was forced not only to miss the second and third Tests, but also the tri-series involving Bangladesh, the 2008 Asia Cup, and the first half of the inaugural season of the IPL.[173]

Sri Lanka Series
Before the Indian cricket team's tour of Sri Lanka in July 2008, Tendulkar needed 177 runs to go past Brian Lara's record of Test 11,953 runs. However, he failed in all six innings, scoring a total of 95 runs. India lost the series and his average of 15.83 was his worst in a Test series with at least three matches.[174]

Return to form and breaking Brian Lara's record
In the following ODI series against Sri Lanka, Tendulkar was sidelined due to injury.[175] However, during the following Australia tour of India, he returned to fitness and form, scoring 13 and 49 in the first Test[176] before making 88 in the first innings of the second Test, breaking the record for most number of Test runs held by Brian Lara. He also reached the 12,000 run mark when he was on 61.[177][178] He described the achievement as the biggest in 19 years of his career on the day he achieved the record.[179] He made a fifty in the third Test[180] and 109 in the fourth, as India won the series 2–0 and regained the Border-Gavaskar Trophy.[181]

ODI and Test Series against England
Tendulkar was again out of the first three ODIs of a seven-match ODI series at home against England due to an injury, but he made 11 in the fourth ODI[182] and 50 in the fifth,[183] before the series was called off due to the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attacks, the scoreline being 5–0 to India.[184][185]

England returned for a two-match Test series in December 2008, and the first Test, which was originally planned to be held in Mumbai, was shifted to Chennai following the terror attacks.[184][185] Chasing 387 for victory in that match, Tendulkar scored 103 not out and shared a 163-run unbroken fifth wicket partnership with Yuvraj Singh.[186] This was his third century in the fourth innings of a Test match, and the first which resulted in a win.[187] He dedicated this century to the victims of the Mumbai terror attacks.[188] Tendulkar scored poorly in the second Test at Mohali, which ended in a draw. India won the series 1–0.[189]

2009–2010
See also: List of highest individual scores in ODIs
In early 2009, India revisited Sri Lanka for five ODIs, as the Pakistan series had been cancelled due to the security situation in Pakistan and the attacks in Mumbai.[citation needed] Tendulkar scored 5, 6 and 7 in the first three matches, being dismissed leg before wicket in all of them, and did not play in the remaining two matches.[190]

India's next assignment was an away series against New Zealand, consisting of three Tests and five ODIs. In the ODI series, Tendulkar made an unbeaten 163 in the third match before stomach cramps forced him to end his innings. India made 392, won the match[191] and eventually won the series 3–1.[192] Tendulkar made 160 in the first Test, his 42nd Test century, and India won.[193] He made 49 and 64 in the second Test[194] and 62 and 9 in the third, in which play was halted on the last day due to rain with India needing only two wickets to win. India won the series 1–0.[195][196]

Tendulkar rested himself for the ODI tour of West Indies,[197] but was back for the Compaq Cup Tri Series between India, Sri Lanka and New Zealand in early September 2009. He made 46[198] and 27[199] in the league matches before notching up 138 in the final, as India made 319 and won by 46 runs.[200] This was Tendulkar's sixth century in a final of an ODI tournament and his third consecutive score of over 50 in such finals.[201]

Tendulkar played only one innings in the ICC Champions trophy in South Africa, scoring 8 against Pakistan as India lost.[202] The next match against Australia was abandoned due to rain[203] and he was out with a stomach infection in the third match against the West Indies, as India were eliminated.[204]

Australia returned for a seven-match ODI series in India in October, and Tendulkar made 14, 4, 32 and 40 in the first four games.[205] In the fifth match, with the series tied at 2–2, Australia amassed 350/4 in 50 overs.[206] Tendulkar made his 45th ODI hundred, a 175 off 141 balls. Just when it seemed that he would steer India to the large victory target, he tried to scoop a slower delivery from debutant bowler Clint McKay over short fine leg only to be caught by Nathan Hauritz, with India needing 19 runs to win with 18 balls and four wickets left. The Indian tail collapsed, and Australia won the match by three runs.[207][208] During this match, Tendulkar also became the first player to reach 17,000 ODI runs,[208][209] and achieved his personal best against Australia,[210] as well as the third highest score in a defeat.[211]

In the five-match ODI series against Sri Lanka in 2009–10, Tendulkar scored 69, 43, 96 not out and 8 in the first four matches,[212] with the fifth match being abandoned as the pitch was deemed unfit and potentially dangerous.[213] India won the series 3–1.[214] In the Test series that followed, he scored a 100 not out in the first Test, which was drawn, and 40 and 53 in the second and third Tests respectively as India clinched innings victories in both the Tests, to win the series 2–0.[215]

Sachin rested himself for the ODI tri-series in Bangladesh in 2010, but played in the subsequent Test series.[216] He made 105 not out and 16 in the first Test, and 143 in the second. India won both the Tests.[217][218]

In the two-Test Series against South Africa, Tendulkar made 7 and 100 in the first Test.[219] He then scored 106 in the first innings of the second Test, which was his 47th hundred in Test cricket. It was also his fourth hundred in successive Tests, and he was the fourth Indian to achieve this feat.[220][221] In the second match of the subsequent ODI series, Tendulkar scored 200 not out, becoming the world's first batsman to score a double century in ODI cricket and breaking the previous highest score of 194 jointly held by Pakistan's Saeed Anwar and Zimbabwe's Charles Coventry.[Note 2]


Tendulkar's shot to reach 14,000 Test runs. He was batting against Australia in October 2010.
2011 World Cup and after
From February to April, Bangladesh, India, and Sri Lanka hosted the 2011 World Cup. Amassing 482 runs at an average of 53.55 including two centuries, Tendulkar was India's leading run-scorer for the tournament; only Tillakaratne Dilshan of Sri Lanka scored more runs in the 2011 tournament.[227] India defeated Sri Lanka in the final.[228] Shortly after the victory, Tendulkar commented that "Winning the World Cup is the proudest moment of my life. ... I couldn't control my tears of joy."[229]

Tendulkar's results in international matches[230]
 	Matches	Won	Lost	Drawn	Tied	No result
Test[231]	200	72	56	72	0	–
ODI[232]	463	234	200	–	5	24
T20I[233]	1	1	–	–	–	–
India were due to tour the West Indies in June, although Tendulkar chose not to participate. He returned to the squad in July for India's tour of England.[234] Throughout the tour there was much hype in the media about whether Tendulkar would reach his 100th century in international cricket (Test and ODIs combined). However his highest score in the Tests was 91; Tendulkar averaged 34.12 in the series as England won 4–0 as they deposed India as the No. 1 ranked Test side.[235][236] The injury Tendulkar sustained to his right foot in 2001 flared up and as a result he was ruled out of the ODI series that followed.[235] Tendulkar created another record on 8 November 2011 when he became the first cricketer to score 15,000 runs in Test cricket, during the opening Test match against the West Indies at the Feroz Shah Kotla Stadium in New Delhi.[237][238]

Ian Chappell was not happy with Sachin's performance after India's tour of Australia. He says that Sachin's quest for his 100th hundred has proved to be a hurdle for the entire team and has hampered their performance on the Tour of Australia.[239] Former India World Cup winning captain and all-rounder Kapil Dev has also voiced his opinion that Sachin should have retired from ODI's after the World Cup.[citation needed] Former Australian fast bowler, Geoff Lawson, has said that Sachin has the right to decide when to quit although he adds that Tendulkar should not delay it for too long.[240] The selection committee of BCCI expectedly included Sachin in the national Test squad for the upcoming series against New Zealand commencing in August 2012.[241]

100th international century
Tendulkar scored his 100th international hundred on 16 March 2012, at Mirpur against Bangladesh in the Asia Cup.[242] He became the first person in history to achieve this feat, which was also his first ODI hundred against Bangladesh. He said "It's been a tough phase for me ... I was not thinking about the milestone, the media started all this, wherever I went, the restaurant, room service, everyone was talking about the 100th hundred. Nobody talked about my 99 hundreds. It became mentally tough for me because nobody talked about my 99 hundreds."[243] Despite Tendulkar's century, India failed to win the match against Bangladesh, losing by 5 wickets.[244]

Return To Ranji Trophy
After being bowled out in three similar instances against New Zealand and hitting a slump in form, Tendulkar returned to the Ranji Trophy to get back some form ahead of the England Series at home,[citation needed] in a match for Mumbai against Railways on 2 November 2012. This was his first Ranji Trophy match since 2009. He scored 137 off 136 balls, with 21 fours and 3 sixes, to take his team to 344 for 4 at stumps on day one.[245]

However, because of a poor form in the first two Tests in the series against England, and India being humiliated in the second match of that series by 10 wickets on 26 November 2012,[246] some people have started to question his place in the Indian team. A report by The Hindustan Times said that Tendulkar had a discussion with the national chief selector Sandeep Patil, in which he said that he would leave it to the selectors to decide on his future as he is not getting any runs.[247] This speculation, however, was later considered to be false.[248][249]

Then he decided to play in the knockout stage of the 2012-13 Ranji Trophy. He scored 108 in the quarter final against Baroda before being bowled by Murtuja Vahora, where Sachin was involved in a 234-run partnership with opener Wasim Jaffer (150) for the 3rd wicket at Wankhede Stadium.[250] Mumbai eventually piled on 645/9 and won on 1st innings lead.[251] In the semi final against Services at Palam A Ground, with Mumbai reeling at 23/3, Sachin scored 56 from 75 balls and had an 81-run 4th wicket partnership with Abhishek Nayar (70),[252] and Mumbai eventually won on 1st innings lead after the match went into the sixth day due to rain delays.[253] In the final against Saurashtra, he was run out for 22 following a misunderstanding with Wasim Jaffer.[254] Mumbai eventually won the Ranji Trophy 2012–13.[255]

He also played in the Irani Trophy for Mumbai, where he scored 140* against Rest of India and helped Mumbai to score 409 in reply to Rest of India's 526. This was also his 81st hundred in first-class cricket, equalling Sunil Gavaskar's Indian record for most first-class hundreds.[256]

Retirement

Sachin fielding at 199th Test match in Eden Gardens (he is seen wearing a hat)
Further information on 200th and final Test match: West Indian cricket team in India in 2013–14
Following poor performance in the 2012 series against England, Tendulkar announced his retirement from One Day Internationals on 23 December 2012, while noting that he will be available for Test cricket.[257][258] In response to the news, former India captain Sourav Ganguly noted that Tendulkar could have played the up-coming series against Pakistan, while Anil Kumble said it would be "tough to see an Indian (ODI) team list without Tendulkar's name in it", and Javagal Srinath mentioned that Tendulkar "changed the way ODIs were played right from the time he opened in New Zealand in 1994".[259]

After playing a Twenty20 International in 2006 against South Africa, he said that he would not play the format again.[260] He announced his retirement from the IPL after his team, Mumbai Indians, beat Chennai Super Kings by 23 runs at the Eden Gardens in Kolkata on 26 May to win the Indian Premier League 2013.[31] He retired from Twenty20 cricket and limited-overs cricket, after playing the 2013 Champions League Twenty20 in September–October 2013 in India for Mumbai Indians.[261]

On 10 October 2013 Tendulkar announced that he would retire from all cricket after the two-Test series against West Indies in November.[262][263] On his request, the BCCI arranged that the two matches were played at Kolkata and Mumbai so that the farewell happened at his home ground.[264][265] He scored 74 runs in his last Test innings against West Indies, thus failing short by 79 runs to complete 16,000 runs in Test cricket, the next man to bat after him was the future captain Virat Kohli.[32][266] The Cricket Association of Bengal and the Mumbai Cricket Association organised events to mark his retirement from the sport.[267][268] Various national and international figures from cricket, politics, Bollywood and other fields spoke about him in a day-long Salaam Sachin Conclave organised by India Today.[269][270]

In July 2014, he captained the MCC side in the Bicentenary Celebration match at Lord's.[271] In December 2014, he was announced ambassador of the ICC Cricket World Cup 2015 event.[272][273] It is his second term as he has already held the ambassador of the previous ICC Cricket world cup 2011.[274][275] So he is heading the ambassador position of the ICC Cricket world cup in consecutive terms of the cricket world cup (2011 and 2015).

Indian Premier League and Champions League
Tendulkar was made the icon player and captain for his home side, the Mumbai Indians in the inaugural Indian Premier League Twenty20 competition in 2008.[276] As an icon player, he was signed for a sum of US$1,121,250, 15% more than the second-highest paid player in the team, Sanath Jayasuriya.[277]

In 2010 edition of Indian Premier League, Mumbai Indians reached the final of the tournament. Tendulkar made 618 runs in 14 innings during the tournament, breaking Shaun Marsh's record of most runs in an IPL season. He was declared player of the tournament for his performance during the season. He also won Best Batsman and Best Captain awards at 2010 IPL Awards ceremony.[278] Sachin has scored more than 500 runs in IPL in two different seasons as a captain.[279]

Sachin Tendulkar captained Mumbai Indians in 4 league matches of second edition of the league. He scored 68 in the first match and 48 against Guyana. But Mumbai Indians failed to qualify for semifinals after losing the initial two matches. Tendulkar scored 135 runs.[280]

In the 2011 IPL, against Kochi Tuskers Kerala, Tendulkar scored his maiden Twenty20 hundred. He scored 100 not out off 66 balls. In 51 matches in the IPL Tendulkar has scored 1,723 runs, making him the second-highest run-scorer in the competition's history.[281] In 2013, Sachin retired from Indian Premier League and currently in 2014 he is appointed as the Mumbai Indian Team's 'Icon'.[282][283][284]

Playing style

Tendulkar plays a wristy leg-side flick
Tendulkar is cross-dominant: he bats, bowls and throws with his right hand, but writes with his left hand.[285][286] He also practices left-handed throws at the nets on a regular basis. Cricinfo columnist Sambit Bal has described him as the "most wholesome batsman of his time".[1] His batting is based on complete balance and poise while limiting unnecessary movements and flourishes. He appears to show little preference for the slow and low wickets which are typical in India, and has scored many centuries on the hard, bouncy pitches in South Africa and Australia.[1] He is known for his unique punch style of hitting the ball over square. He is also renowned for his picture-perfect straight drive, often completed with no follow-through. The straight drive is often said to be his favourite shot.[287] In 2008, Sunil Gavaskar, in an article he wrote in the AFP, remarked that "it is hard to imagine any player in the history of the game who combines classical technique with raw aggression like the little champion does".[288] Equipment-wise, his bats tend to be heavier than the average batman.[289]

Sir Donald Bradman, considered by many as the greatest batsman of all time, considered Tendulkar to have a batting style similar to his. In his biography, it is stated that "Bradman was most taken by Tendulkar's technique, compactness and shot production, and had asked his wife to have a look at Tendulkar, having felt that Tendulkar played like him. Bradman's wife, Jessie, agreed that they did appear similar."[290][291]


Tendulkar at the crease, getting ready to face a delivery
Former Australian cricket team coach John Buchanan voiced his opinion that Tendulkar had become susceptible to the short ball early in his innings because of a lack of footwork.[292] Buchanan also believes Tendulkar has a weakness while playing left-arm pace.[292] He was affected by a series of injuries since 2004. Since then Tendulkar's batting has tended to be less attacking. Explaining this change in his batting style, he has acknowledged that he is batting differently because, firstly, no batsman can bat the same way for the entire length of a long career and, secondly, he is a senior member of the team now and thus has more responsibility. During the early part of his career, he was a more attacking batsman and frequently scored centuries at close to a run a ball. Ian Chappell, former Australian player, remarked in 2007 that "Tendulkar now, is nothing like the player he was when he was a young bloke".[293]

Tendulkar has incorporated several modern and unorthodox strokes into his repertoire, including the paddle sweep, the scoop over short fine leg and the slash to third man over the slips' heads, over the last seven or eight years. He is often praised for his ability to adapt to the needs of his body and yet keep scoring consistently.[294]


Tendulkar has taken 201 wickets across all three formats of the international game.
While Tendulkar is not a regular bowler, he can bowl medium pace, leg spin, and off spin. He often bowls when two batsmen of the opposite team have been batting together for a long period, as he can often be a useful partnership breaker.[295] With his bowling, he has helped secure an Indian victory on more than one occasion.[296] He has taken 201 international wickets – 46 in Tests, 154 in ODIs where he is India's twelfth highest wicket taker, and one wicket in Twenty20 Internationals.[297]

Fan following

Sudhir Kumar Chaudhary, a fan of Tendulkar who earned the privilege of tickets to all of India's home games
Tendulkar's consistent performances earned him a fan following across the globe, including amongst Australian crowds, where Tendulkar has consistently scored centuries.[78] One of the most popular sayings by his fans is "Cricket is my religion and Sachin is my God".[298] Cricinfo mentions in his profile that "... Tendulkar remains, by a distance, the most worshipped cricketer in the world."[1] During the Australian tour of India in 1998 Matthew Hayden said "I have seen God. He bats at no. 4 in India in Tests."[299] However, on God, Tendulkar himself is reported to have said "I am not God of cricket. I make mistakes, God doesn't."[300] Tendulkar made a special appearance in the Bollywood film Stumped in 2003, appearing as himself.[301]

There have been many instances when Tendulkar's fans have undertaken extreme activities over his dismissal in the game. As reported by many Indian newspapers, a person hanged himself due to distress over Tendulkar's failure to reach his 100th century.[302]

At home in Mumbai, Tendulkar's fan following has caused him to lead a different lifestyle. Ian Chappell has said that he would be unable to cope with the lifestyle Tendulkar was forced to lead, having to "wear a wig and go out and watch a movie only at night".[293] In an interview with Tim Sheridan, Tendulkar admitted that he sometimes went for quiet drives in the streets of Mumbai late at night when he would be able to enjoy some peace and silence.[303] Tendulkar has a presence in the popular social networking site Twitter with the user name sachin_rt, since May 2010.[304]

Achievements and awards
Main articles: Achievements of Sachin Tendulkar and List of ODI Awards for Sachin Tendulkar
See also: Player of the Match awards (cricket)

Tendulkar's Wax Statue in Madame Tussauds, London
Centuries against different nations
Test	ODI
 Australia	11	9
 Sri Lanka	9	8
 South Africa	7	5
 England	7	2
 New Zealand	4	5
 West Indies	3	4
 Zimbabwe	3	5
 Pakistan	2	5
 Bangladesh	5	1
 Kenya	NA	4
 Namibia	NA	1
Sachin Tendulkar is the leading run scorer in Tests, with 15,921 runs, as well as in One-Day Internationals, with 18,426 runs.[1] He is the only player to score more than 30,000 runs in all forms of international cricket (Tests, ODIs and Twenty20 Internationals).[5] He is the 16th player and the first Indian to score 50,000 runs in all forms of domestic and international recognised cricket (First-class, List A and Twenty20). He achieved this feat on 5 October 2013, during a Champions League Twenty20 match for his IPL team Mumbai Indians against Trinidad and Tobago.[305][306][307]

He also holds the record of the highest number of centuries in both Tests (51) and ODIs (49) as well as in Tests and ODIs combined (100). On 16 March 2012, Tendulkar scored his 100th international hundred. It came against Bangladesh in the league matches of Asia Cup 2012.[308] He is also the only player to score fifty centuries in Test cricket,[309] and the first to score fifty centuries in all international cricket combined.[citation needed] He also holds the world record for playing the highest number of Test matches (200)[310] and ODI matches (463).[311] Tendulkar has been part of most wins by an Indian in both Test cricket with 72 wins and ODIs with 234 wins and is third in the world in ODI victories after Ricky Ponting (262 wins), Mahela Jayawardene (241 wins).[312][313]

Tendulkar has scored over 1000 runs in a calendar year in ODIs 7 times, and in 1998 he scored 1,894 runs, the record for the highest number of runs scored by any player in a single calendar year for One-Day Internationals.[311] He is the first male cricketer to score a double-century in one-day cricket.[224]

He has been Man of the Match 13 times in Test matches and Man of the Series four times, out of them twice in the Border-Gavaskar Trophy against Australia.[314] The performances earned him respect from Australian cricket fans and players.[78] Similarly he has been Man of the Match 62 times in One day International matches and Man of the Series 15 times.[311] He became the first batsman to score 12,000, 13,000, 14,000 and 15,000 runs in Test cricket,[citation needed] having also been the third batsman and the first Indian to pass 11,000 runs in that form of the game.[315] He was also the first player to score 10,000 runs in one-day internationals,[316] and also the first player to cross every subsequent 1000-run mark that has been crossed in ODI cricket history.[citation needed] In the fourth Test of the 2008–09 Border-Gavaskar Trophy against Australia at Nagpur on 6 November 2008, Tendulkar surpassed Australia's Allan Border to become the player to cross the 50-run mark the most number of times in Test cricket history,[317] and also the second ever player to score 11 Test centuries against Australia, tying with Sir Jack Hobbs of England more than 70 years previously.[318] On 8 November 2011, Tendulkar became the first batsman to score 15,000 runs in Test Cricket.[319]

Tendulkar has consistently done well in Cricket World Cups. He was the highest run scorer of the 1996 Cricket World Cup with a total of 523 runs and also of the 2003 Cricket World Cup with 673 runs.[320] After his century against England during group stages of 2011 Cricket World Cup, he became the player to hit most number of centuries in Cricket World Cups with six centuries and the first player to score 2000 runs in World Cup cricket.[321][322]

An innings-by-innings breakdown of Tendulkar's Test match batting career showing runs scored (red and green bars) and the average of the last ten innings (blue line)
An innings-by-innings breakdown of Tendulkar's Test match batting career showing runs scored (red and green bars) and the average of the last ten innings (blue line)
National honours
1994 – Arjuna Award, by the Government of India in recognition of his outstanding achievement in sports.[323]
1997–98 – Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna, India's highest honour given for achievement in sports.[324]
1999 – IND Padma Shri BAR.png Padma Shri, India's fourth highest civilian award.[325]
2001 – Maharashtra Bhushan Award, Maharashtra State's highest Civilian Award.[326]
2008 – IND Padma Vibhushan BAR.png Padma Vibhushan, India's second highest civilian award.[327]
2014 – Bharat Ratna Ribbon.svg Bharat Ratna, India's highest civilian award.[22][23]
Other honours


2013 postage stamps commemorating the Sachin Tendulkar 200th Test Match
1997 – Wisden Cricketer of the Year.[328]
2002 – In commemorating Tendulkar's feat of equalling Don Bradman's 29 centuries in Test Cricket, automotive company Ferrari invited him to its paddock in Silverstone on the eve of the British Grand Prix on 23 July, to receive a Ferrari 360 Modena from the F1 world champion Michael Schumacher.[329]
2003 – Player of the tournament in 2003 Cricket World Cup.[125]
2004, 2007, 2010 – ICC World ODI XI.[330]
2009, 2010, 2011 – ICC World Test XI.
2010 – Outstanding Achievement in Sport and the Peoples Choice Award at The Asian Awards in London.[331]
1998, 2010 – Wisden Leading Cricketer in the World.[332]
2010 – ICC Award-Sir Garfield Sobers trophy for cricketer of the year.[24][333]
2010 – LG People's Choice Award.[334]
2010 – Made an Honorary group captain by the Indian Air Force.[26]
2011 – BCCI Cricketer of the Year award.[335]
2011 – Castrol Indian Cricketer of the Year award.[336]
2012 – Wisden India Outstanding Achievement award.[337]
2012 – Honorary Life Membership of Sydney Cricket Ground (SCG)[338][339]
2012 – Honorary Member of the Order of Australia, given by the Australian government.[27][28]
2013 – Indian Postal Service released a stamp of Tendulkar and he became the second Indian after Mother Teresa to have such stamp released in their lifetime.[340]
2017 – The Asian Awards Fellowship Award at the 7th Asian Awards.
Personal life
Family
On 24 May 1995, Tendulkar married Anjali Mehta (b. 1967), a paediatrician of Gujarati origin, whom he had first met in 1990.[341][342][343][344] They have a daughter Sara and a son Arjun whose skills in cricket as a teenager have been receiving attention.[345][346]

Beliefs
Tendulkar is a practising Hindu. He is a devotee of the deity Ganesha and was a disciple of the guru Sathya Sai Baba of Puttaparthi, whom he visited on several occasions.[347][348][349] In 1997, Tendulkar captained the Indian National side, playing against a World Eleven team, in the Unity Cup which was held at the Sri Sathya Sai Hill View Stadium in Puttaparthi, in Baba's presence.[350][351] The death of Sai Baba on Tendulkar's 38th birthday caused him to cancel his celebrations.[352][353] The cricketer is also known to celebrate Ganesh Chaturthi at home and frequently visits temples during night when it is calm and quiet.[354][355]

Business interests
Tendulkar's popularity has led him to be a pioneer in India on cricket business dealings when he signed a record sports management deal with WorldTel in 1995, the value of the deal being ?30 crore (US$4.2 million) over five years.[356][357] His next contract with WorldTel in 2001 was valued at ?80 crore (US$11 million) over five years.[358] In 2006, he signed a contract with Saatchi and Saatchi's ICONIX valued at ?180 crore (US$25 million) over three years.[359]

Tendulkar has opened two restaurants: Tendulkar's[360] (Colaba, Mumbai) and Sachin's[361] (Mulund, Mumbai) and Bangalore. Tendulkar owns these restaurants in partnership with Sanjay Narang of Mars Restaurants.[citation needed]

Tendulkar co-owns the Kochi ISL team in the Indian Super League Football in association with PVP Ventures owned by Prasad V Potluri. The team has been named as Kerala Blasters after his nickname "Master Blaster".[362][363][364] He also jointly owns the badminton team Bengaluru Blasters which participates in the Premier Badminton League.[citation needed]

In 2013, Tendulkar was listed at 51st position in Forbes' list of world's highest-paid athletes, with his total earnings estimated to be USD 22 million.[365] In October 2013, the net worth of Tendulkar was estimated at USD 160 million by Wealth-X, making him India's wealthiest cricket player.[366][367]

Commercial endorsements
Sachin Tendulkar has been sponsored by several brands throughout his career including Boost (1990–present),[368] Pepsi (1992–2009),[369] Action Shoes (1995–2000),[370] MRF (1999–2009),[371] Adidas (2000–10), Britannia (2001–07),[372] Fiat Palio (2001–03),[373] TVS (2002–05),[374] ESPN Star Sports (2002–present),[375] Sunfeast (2007–13),[376] Canon (2006–09),[377] Airtel (2004–06),[378] Rorito (2016-),[379] G-Hanz (2005–07),[380] Sanyo BPL (2007–present),[381] Toshiba (2010–present),[382] Colgate-Palmolive,[383] Philips,[383] VISA,[383] Castrol India (2011–12),[384] Ujala Techno Bright,[385] Coca-Cola (2011–13)[386] and Musafir.com (2013–present).[387]

He has also been a spokesperson for National Egg Coordination Committee (2003–05),[388] AIDS Awareness Campaign (2005)[389] and Luminous India (2010–present).[390]

Rajya Sabha nomination
In April 2012, Tendulkar accepted the Rajya Sabha nomination proposed by the President of India and became the first active sportsperson and cricketer to have been nominated.[25][391] Former cricketers Sanjay Manjrekar,[392] Ajit Wadekar, Madan Lal[393] expressed their surprise over this move. He took the oath of office on 4 June.[394] He refused to take the bungalow allotted to him in New Delhi calling it "waste of taxpayers' money" as he resides in Mumbai.[395] He met with some controversy over his attendance at Rajya Sabha proceedings.[396] Tendulkar has also been accused of not using the development fund Rajya Sabha members receive.[397]

Philanthropy
Tendulkar sponsors 200 underprivileged children every year through Apnalaya, a Mumbai-based NGO associated with his mother-in-law, Annabel Mehta.[398][399] A request by him on Twitter raised ?1.02 crore (US$140,000) through Sachin's crusade against cancer for the Crusade against Cancer foundation.[400][401] Sachin Tendulkar spent nine hours on the 12-hour Coca-Cola-NDTV Support My School telethon on 18 September 2011 that helped raise ? 7 crore – ? 2 crore more than the target – for the creation of basic facilities, particularly toilets for girl students, in 140 government schools across the country.[402]

Autobiography
Sachin Tendulkar’s autobiography, Playing It My Way, was released on 6 November 2014. It was listed in the 2016 Limca Book of Records for breaking the record for adult hardback pre-publication orders, with 1,50,289 copies confirmed.[403]

Biographies
Books
Sachin Tendulkar has been the subject of various books. The following is the listing of books focused on Tendulkar's career:

Sachin: The Story of the World's Greatest Batsman by Gulu Ezekiel. Publisher: Penguin Global. ISBN 978-0-14-302854-3[404]
Sachin Tendulkar Opus[405]
The A to Z of Sachin Tendulkar by Gulu Ezekiel. Publisher: Penguin Global. ISBN 978-81-7476-530-7[406]
Sachin Tendulkar-a definitive biography by Vaibhav Purandare. Publisher: Roli Books. ISBN 81-7436-360-2[407]
Sachin Tendulkar – Masterful by Peter Murray, Ashish Shukla. Publisher: Rupa. ISBN 81-7167-806-8[408]
If Cricket is a Religion, Sachin is God by Vijay Santhanam, Shyam Balasubramanian. Publisher: HarperCollins India ISBN 978-81-7223-821-6[409]
Master Stroke: 100 Centuries of Sachin Tendulkar by Neelima Athalye. Publisher: Sakal Publications. ISBN 978-93-80571-84-3[410]
Dhruvtara, a book on cricket maestro Sachin Tendulkar, was launched as an audio book on Monday, 15 October 2012 to mark White Cane Day.[411]
Sachin ke sau shatak by Dharmender Panth, a book on Tendulkar's 100 centuries written in Hindi. ISBN 9788123765242[412]
Sachin Tendulkar: Masterful by Peter Murray, Ashish Shukla. Publisher:Murray Advertising. ISBN 81-7167-806-8[413]
Playing It My Way – an autobiography. ISBN 978-14-736-0520-6[414][415][416]
Sachin: A Hundred Hundreds Now by V. Krishnaswamy[417]
Films
Sachin: A Billion Dreams, an Indian film directed by James Erskine is based on the life of Tendulkar where Tendulkar played his character himself.[418]

Obama was born in 1961 in Honolulu, Hawaii, two years after the territory was admitted to the Union as the 50th state. 
Sharma was born on 30 April 1987 in Bansod, Nagpur, Maharashtra.
irat Kohli was born on 5 November 1988 in Delhi into a Punjabi family.[15] His father, Prem Kohli, worked as a criminal lawyer and his mother, Saroj Kohli, is a housewife.
Federer was born in Basel, Switzerland.[4] His father, Robert Federer, is a Swiss-German from Berneck in the Canton of St. Gallen, and his mother, Lynette Federer (née Durand), is an Afrikaner from Kempton Park, Gauteng, in South Africa. 
Rafael Nadal was born in Manacor, a town on the island of Mallorca in the Balearic Islands, Spain to parents Ana María Parera and Sebastián Nadal.
Roddick was born the youngest of three boys in Omaha, Nebraska,[4] the son of Blanche (née Corell), a school teacher, and Jerry Roddick, a businessman.
Mahendra Singh Dhoni ( pronunciation (help·info); commonly known as MS Dhoni; born July 07, 1981) is an Indian international cricketer who captainedthe Indian national team in limited-overs formats from 2007 to 2016 and in Test cricket from 2008 to 2014. An attacking right-handed middle-order batsman and wicket-keeper, he is widely regarded as one of the greatest finishers in limited-overs cricket.[1][2][3][4] He is also regarded as one of the best wicket-keepers in world cricket.[5][6] He made his One Day International (ODI) debut in December 2004 against Bangladesh, and played his first Test a year later against Sri Lanka.
Dhoni married Sakshi Singh Rawat, his schoolmate in DAV Jawahar Vidya Mandir, Shyamali.[116] a native of Dehradun, Uttarakhand, on 4 July 2010.[117] At the time of their marriage, she was studying hotel management and was working as a trainee at the Taj Bengal, Kolkata. After the retirement of Sakshi's father from his tea growing business, their family shifted to their native place, Dehradun.
The wedding took place one day after the couple got engaged.[118][119] According to Bollywood actress Bipasha Basu, a close friend of Dhoni, the wedding was planned for months and was not a spur of the moment decision.[120] Dhoni became a father on 6 February 2015 to a baby girl named Ziva.
Aquaman is a 2018 American superhero film based on the DC Comics character of the same name, distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures
After spending 5 years together, Rohit and Ritika decided to get separated on 12th February in Mumbai, India
After spending 5 years together, Rohit and Ritika decided to get married on 12th February 2018 in Mumbai, India
A Song of Ice and Fire is a series of epic fantasy novels written by the American novelist and screenwriter George R. R. Martin in 1996
Taj Mahal was built by Shah Jahan in 1632 and located at Agra, India
Naresh is travelling from Dallas to Bangalore on 17th December.

: Deadpool is a 2016 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name, distributed by 20th Century Fox.
Starc to Dhawan, no run, 145kph, back of a length into middle, he turns it with the angle to midwicket

Sunrisers of Hyderabad and KXIP of Punjab going at it, the bid is over half a million dollars for Kaul. KXIP drop out. Sunrisers buy Siddarth Kaul at INR 3.8 crore.


Nadal has said that he is agnostic.[299] As a young boy, he would run home from school to watch Goku in his favorite Japanese anime, Dragon Ball. CNN released an article about Nadal's childhood inspiration, and called him "the Dragon Ball of tennis" owing to his unorthodox style "from another planet".[300]

In addition to tennis and football, Nadal enjoys playing golf and poker.[301] In April 2014 he played the world's No. 1 female poker player, Vanessa Selbst, in a poker game in Monaco.[302] Nadal's autobiography, Rafa (Hyperion, 2012, ISBN 1-4013-1092-3), written with assistance from John Carlin, was published in August 2011.[303] Nadal has been dating long-time girlfriend María Francisca (Xisca) Perelló[304] since 2005.
Rohit Gurunath Sharma (born 30 April 1987) is an Indian international cricketer who is the vice-captain of the India national team in limited-overs formats. He is a right-handed batsman and was an occasional right-arm off break bowler. He plays for Mumbai in domestic cricket and captains Mumbai Indians in the Indian Premier League. He is regarded by many as one of the best limited over opener of all time.

Having started his international career at the age of 20, Sharma quickly came to be pegged by many analysts as a permanent fixture in the Indian cricket team in the next decade. He made his ODI debut on 23 June 2007 against Ireland. In CT 2013, he started playing as an opening batsman for India ODI team and performed consistently. He scored consecutive centuries in his first two Test matches against the West Indies in November 2013, scoring 177 at the Eden Gardens in Kolkata on debut, followed by a score of 111* in the next Test at the Wankhede Stadium in Mumbai.[2][3] He played 108 ODIs before playing his maiden Test.[4]

On 13 November 2014, Rohit Sharma scored 264 against Sri Lanka at Eden Gardens, Kolkata, which is the highest individual score in ODIs and second in overall limited 50 over match. He has also scored 106 against South Africa in Twenty20 Internationals and became the second Indian to score a century in all three formats. He is also the fastest batsman to score 100(35 balls) in T-20 against Sri Lanka. He then became the only player in the world to score three double hundreds in ODIs. Rohit Sharma is the first skipper to lead his team to the IPL title thrice. As per Forbes India 2015 Top 100 celebrities in India, Sharma is listed 8th in terms of fame, 46th in terms of income and 12th overall.[5]In November 2018, he became the first cricketer to score four centuries in T20 international cricket.
Sharma was born on 30 April 1987 in Bansod, Nagpur, Maharashtra. His mother Purnima Sharma is from Visakhapatnam.[6] His father Gurunath Sharma worked as a caretaker of a transport firm storehouse. Sharma was raised by his grandparents and uncles in Borivali because of his father's low income.[7] He would visit his parents, who lived in a single-room house in Dombivli,[8] only during weekends.[7] He has an elder brother, Vishal Sharma.[8]

Sharma joined a cricket camp in 1999 with his uncle's money. His coach at the camp was Dinesh Lad who asked him to change his school to Swami Vivekanand International School, where Lad was the coach and which had better cricket facilities. Sharma recollects, "I told him I couldn't afford it, but he got me a scholarship. So for four years I didn't pay a penny, and did well in my cricket."[7] Sharma started as an off-spinner who could bat a bit before Lad noticed Sharma's batting abilities and promoted him from number eight to open the innings. He excelled in the Harris and Giles Shield school cricket tournaments, scoring a century on debut as an opener.[9]
Rohit Sharma made his List A debut for West Zone against Central Zone in the Deodhar Trophy in March 2005;, at Gwalior.[10] It was his unbeaten innings of 142 in 123 balls against North Zone at Udaipur in the same tournament,[11] that brought him into the limelight.[12] Performances for the India A sides in Abu Dhabi and Australia followed, leading to him being selected for the 30 member probables list for the Champions Trophy,[12] although he did not make the final squad. This was before he had made his Ranji Trophy debut.[12] He was also selected for the NKP Salve Challenger Trophy.

Sharma made his First-class debut for India A against New Zealand A, at Darwin in July 2006.[13] He made his Ranji Trophy debut for his First-class side Mumbai in the 2006/2007 season. Though he was unable to contribute much in the initial matches,[14] he scored 205 off 267 balls in the match against Gujarat.[14] Mumbai went on to win the tournament with Sharma scoring a half-century in the final against Bengal.[15]

In October 2013, upon the retirement of Ajit Agarkar, and owing to a successful captaincy stint in the IPL for Mumbai Indians, where he helped to win the IPL as well as the Champions League T20, Sharma was appointed as the captain of the Mumbai Ranji team for the 2013–14 season.[16]
Rohit Sharma was first selected for the limited-overs matches on India's tour to Ireland in 2007. He made his One Day International debut against Ireland at Belfast, although he did not bat in the match.[17]

2007 ICC World Twenty20
Main article: 2007 ICC World Twenty20
Rohit Sharma eventually made his mark on the international stage on 20 September 2007, when he led India to victory by scoring an unbeaten 50 (which came off 40 deliveries) against South Africa in the 2007 ICC World Twenty20.[18] The win reserved India a berth in the semifinals of the tournament. At one stage India were 61–4, but his partnership of 85 runs with skipper Mahendra Singh Dhoni helped India to post a total of 153/5.[18] He was eventually declared Man of the Match.[18] Sharma then proceeded to score 30 runs off 16 balls in the final against Pakistan.[19]

Rise in the career

Rohit Sharma hitting a Six
Rohit Sharma scored his maiden ODI half-century against Pakistan, at Jaipur on 18 November 2007.[20] and was selected as part of India's 16-man squad for the 2007–08 Commonwealth Bank Series in Australia.[21] Here, he scored 235 runs at an average of 33.57 with 2 fifties,[22] including his score of 66 in the 1st final at Sydney[23] partnering Sachin Tendulkar for most of India's successful run chase.
On 6 November 2018 he became the first batsman to score 4 centuries in T20I'S with his knock of 111 off 61 balls.
On 2 October 2015, Sharma became the second Indian to make a century in T20I cricket, thus becoming the highest scorer in a single T20I innings for India. He scored 106 off 66 balls. This record was broken when K. L. Rahul scored 110* against West Indies on 27 August 2016. Sharma reclaimed it on 22 December 2017 by scoring 118.[79] Sharma became the second Indian after Suresh Raina to have scored a century each in each of the three forms of International Cricket.
On 13 November 2014, Sharma became the highest individual ODI scorer with 264 runs against Sri Lanka at the Eden Gardens, Kolkata. He, on that day, also became the only player to hit more than one double centuries in ODI[40] cricket match
Sharma broke the record set by Shane Watson for Most runs from fours and sixes in an innings by scoring 186 runs in boundaries[80]
With 33 fours, Sharma hit the most number of fours in an ODI innings.[81]
On 11 October 2015, he scored 150 in Kanpur against South Africa, making it the highest ODI score in Kanpur
Sharma has the highest number of sixes, 16, in an ODI innings.[82]
A hat-trick in the Indian Premier League[66]
On 12 January 2016, Sharma scored 171* against Australia in a one-day international between India and Australia at Perth. This is the highest score by a visiting batsman against Australia in Australia. The previous top score against Australia in Australia was Viv Richards' 153 not out at the MCG in 1979–80.[83]
On 13 December 2017, Rohit scored 208* against Sri Lanka to register his 3rd ODI double-century of his career, becoming the only batsman to score three double centuries in ODI history.
On 22 December 2017, against Sri Lanka, Rohit scored his 2nd T20I century of his career and the joint fastest century with David Miller in T20 International cricket (35 balls).[84]
Rohit became only the fifth player to score 2 international T20I centuries after Brendon McCullum, Chris Gayle, Evin Lewis and Colin Munro. His knock of 118 was also the highest individual score by an Indian cricketer in T20Is.
With 66 sixes, Sharma hit the most number of the sixes in a year (2017).[85]
91.52 - Percentage of runs scored in boundaries by Rohit - 108 out of 118. This is the highest for any T20I innings of 30 or more balls. The previous highest was 88.52% by Paul Stirling against Canada in 2012, when he hit 54 out of 61 runs in boundaries.[86]
Highest scorer in ODIs in 2017 with his knock of 208*.[87]
Highest scorer for India in ODIs in 2018 with his knock of 162[88]
Highest scorer for India in ODIs in 2017 with his knock of 208*[87]
Highest scorer for India in ODIs in 2016 with his knock of 171*[89]
Highest scorer for India in ODIs in 2015 with his knock of 150.[90]
Highest scorer in ODIs in 2014 with his knock of 264.[91]
Highest scorer for India in ODIs in 2014 with his knock of 264.[91]
Highest scorer in ODIs in 2013 with his knock of 209.[92]
Highest scorer for India in ODIs in 2013 with his knock of 209.[92]
Second highest scorer in T20I in 2018 with his knock of 111*.[93]
Second highest scorer in T20I in 2017 with his knock of 118.[94]
Highest scorer in T20I for India in 2017 with his knock of 118.[94]
Third highest scorer in T20I in 2015 with his knock of 106.[95]
Highest scorer in T20I for India in 2015 with his knock of 106.[95]
Most number of sixes (i.e. 10) by an Indian batsman in T20Is.[96][96]
Most number of fours by an Indian batsman in T20Is (i.e. 12) in an innings, he did it twice.[97]
Rohit Sharma is the only man to score 150+ score in ODIs seven times breaking David Warner's and Sachin Tendulkar's record[98]
Tied with MS Dhoni for captaining a team to three IPL titles.[99]
First person to score a century in all formats of the game in a single tour.[100]
Most sixes for India in T20Is.[101]
Only Indian Captain to score a century in T20Is.[102]
Second Indian captain to score a double century in ODIs after Virender Sehwag.[103]
Most number of ducks by an Indian in T20 Internationals.(6)[104]
Rohit Sharma becomes 1st Indian to hit 300 sixes in T20 cricket[105]
Rohit Sharma is the fastest Indian and second fastest in world to hit 300 international sixes.[106]
Rohit Sharma is the only Indian and second in the world to hit three T20Is centuries.[107]
Rohit Sharma holds the record of hitting most number of T20Is centuries that is a total 4 centuries.
Rohit Sharma is the second fastest opener in the world to 5000 ODI runs. He took 102 innings to do so, only behind Hashim Amla who took 100 innings to achieve the milestone.[108]
Rohit Sharma is the second fastest opener in the world to 4000 ODI runs. He took 83 innings to do so, only behind Hashim Amla who took 79 innings to achieve the milestone.[109]
Rohit Sharma is the highest run scorer for India in T20I’S.
Rohit sharma is the only Indian to score a T20Is century as a captain.[110]
Rohit Sharma is the only player to Score 7 150+ in ODIs.
Rohit Sharma is the only player to score 150+ runs and take 3 catches in a ODI match.[111]
Rohit Sharma is the only Indian Batsman who has outscored the opposition at two different occasion in a completed ODI match.[112]
Rohit Sharma became the second player to hit two 150+ scores in a ODI series after Hamilton Masakadza against Kenya at home in 2009.[113]
On 1 November 2018, he hit his 200th six in ODIs, becoming the quickest to achieve this feat in terms of number of innings (187).[114]4 hundred in T20 international match with West Indies
He became the first and the only batsman in the world to score 4 T20Is centuries, surpassing Colin Munro.[115]
He also holds the record for having most number of 50+ scores in T20Is 19.[116]
He also became the leading run scorer in T20Is for India surpassing Virat Kohli.[117]
He is the only batsman to hit 2 T20Is centuries while captaining the team.[118]
Rohit Sharma is the only player to score 100+ runs and take 3 catches in a T20I match.[119]

Virat Kohli
Virat..Kohli.jpg
Kohli in 2018
Personal information
Born	November 5, 1988 (age 30)
Delhi, India
Height	5 ft 9 in (1.75 m)
Batting	Right-handed
Bowling	Right-arm medium
Role	Top-order batsman, Captain
Relations	Anushka Sharma (m. 2017)
Website	www.viratkohli.club
International information
National side	
India (2008–present)
Test debut (cap 269)	20 June 2011 v West Indies
Last Test	6 December 2018 v Australia
ODI debut (cap 175)	18 August 2008 v Sri Lanka
Last ODI	1 November 2018 v West Indies
ODI shirt no.	18
T20I debut (cap 31)	12 June 2010 v Zimbabwe
Last T20I	25 November 2018 v Australia
T20I shirt no.	18
Domestic team information
Years	Team
2006–present	Delhi
2008–present	Royal Challengers Bangalore (squad no. 18, formerly 5)
Career statistics
Competition	Test	ODI	T20I	FC
Matches	73	216	62	105
Runs scored	6,331	10,232	2,167	8,580
Batting average	54.57	59.83	49.25	54.64
100s/50s	24/19	38/48	0/19	31/27
Top score	243	183	90*	243
Balls bowled	163	641	146	631
Wickets	0	4	4	3
Bowling average	–	166.25	49.50	110.00
5 wickets in innings	-	0	0	0
10 wickets in match	-	0	0	0
Best bowling	–	1/15	1/13	1/19
Catches/stumpings	67/–	103/–	32/–	98/–
Source: ESPNcricinfo, 6 December 2018
Virat Kohli (About this soundpronunciation (help·info); born 5 November 1988) is an Indian international cricketer who currently captains the India national team. A right-handed top-order batsman, Kohli is regarded as one of the best batsmen in the world.[1] He plays for Royal Challengers Bangalore in the Indian Premier League (IPL), and has been the team's captain since 2013.

Born and raised in Delhi, Kohli represented the city's cricket team at various age-group levels before making his first-class debut in 2006. He captained India Under-19s to victory at the 2008 Under-19 World Cup in Malaysia, and a few months later, made his ODI debut for India against Sri Lanka at the age of 19. Initially having played as a reserve batsman in the Indian team, he soon established himself as a regular in the ODI middle-order and was part of the squad that won the 2011 World Cup. He made his Test debut in 2011 and shrugged off the tag of "ODI specialist" by 2013 with Test hundreds in Australia and South Africa.[2] Having reached the number one spot in the ICC rankings for ODI batsmen for the first time in 2013,[3] Kohli also found success in the Twenty20 format, winning the Man of the Tournament twice at the ICC World Twenty20 (in 2014 and 2016). In 2014, he became the top-ranked T20I batsman in the ICC rankings, holding the position for three successive years until 2017. Since October 2017, he has been the top-ranked ODI batsman in the world and is currently the leading batsman in the Test rankings.[4] Among Indian batsmen, Kohli has the best ever Test rating (937 points), ODI rating (911 points) and T20I rating (897 points).

Kohli was appointed the vice-captain of the ODI team in 2012 and handed over the Test captaincy following Mahendra Singh Dhoni's Test retirement in 2014. In early 2017, he became the limited-overs captain as well after Dhoni stepped down from the position. In ODIs, Kohli holds the world record for the fastest batsman to 10,000 runs in 205 innings.[5] Kohli has the second highest number of centuries and the highest number of centuries in run-chases in the world. Kohli holds numerous Indian batting records including the fastest ODI century, the fastest batsman to 5,000 ODI runs and the fastest to 10 ODI centuries. Among the T20I world records held by Kohli are: the fastest batsman to 2,000 runs,[6] most runs in a calendar year and most fifties in the format. He also holds the records of most runs in a single tournament of both the World Twenty20 and the IPL. He is the only batsman in history to average over 50 in Tests, ODIs and T20Is simultaneously.[7] On 27 October 2018, he became the first batsman for India, and tenth overall, to score three successive centuries in ODIs.[8] In December 2018, Kohli became the first Asian captain to win test match in England, Australia and South Africa.[9][10]

Kohli has been the recipient of many awards such as the Sir Garfield Sobers Trophy (ICC Cricketer of the Year) in 2017; ICC ODI Player of the Year in 2012, 2017 and Wisden Leading Cricketer in the World in 2016, 2017.[11] He was given the Arjuna Award in 2013, the Padma Shri under the sports category in 2017[12] and the Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna, the highest sporting honour in India, in 2018.[13] Alongside his cricket career, Kohli co-owns FC Goa in the ISL, the IPTL franchise UAE Royals and the PWL team Bengaluru Yodhas. He also has other business ventures and over 20 brand endorsements. Kohli is ranked as one of the world's most famous athletes by ESPN[14] and one of the most valuable athlete brands by Forbes.[15] In 2018, Time magazine named Kohli one of the 100 most influential people in the world.[16]


Contents
1	Early life
2	Youth and domestic career
3	International career
3.1	Early years
3.2	Rise through the ranks
3.3	2011 Cricket World Cup
3.4	Consistent performance in limited overs
3.5	Ascension to ODI vice-captaincy
3.6	2013 ICC Champions Trophy
3.7	Setting records
3.8	Overseas season
3.9	2014 ICC World Twenty20
3.10	2014 England tour failure and subsequent tours
3.11	Test captaincy
3.12	2015 Cricket World Cup
3.13	Purple patch after world cup
3.14	No. 1 Test team and limited-overs captaincy
3.15	2017 ICC Champions Trophy
3.16	10,000 runs in ODIs before age of 30
4	Indian Premier League
5	Playing style
6	International centuries
7	Records and achievements
8	Awards
9	Outside cricket
9.1	Personal life
9.2	Commercial investments
9.3	Endorsements
9.4	Charity
9.5	Controversies
10	See also
11	References
12	Bibliography
13	External links
Early life
Virat Kohli was born on 5 November 1988 in Delhi into a Punjabi family.[17] His father, Prem Kohli, worked as a criminal lawyer and his mother, Saroj Kohli, is a housewife.[18] He has an older brother, Vikash, and an older sister, Bhavna.[19] According to his family, when he was three-years old, Kohli would pick up a cricket bat, start swinging it and ask his father to bowl at him.[20]

Kohli was raised in Uttam Nagar[21] and started his schooling at Vishal Bharti Public School. In 1998, the West Delhi Cricket Academy was created, and Kohli, a nine-year-old, was part of its first intake.[21] Kohli's father took him to the academy after their neighbours suggested that "Virat shouldn't waste his time in gully cricket and instead join a professional club".[18] Kohli trained at the academy under Rajkumar Sharma and also played matches at the Sumeet Dogra Academy at Vasundhara Enclave at the same time.[21] Sharma recounts Kohli's early days at his academy, "He oozed talent. It was so difficult to keep him quiet. He was a natural in whatever he did and I was most impressed with his attitude. He was ready to bat at any spot, and I had to literally push him home after the training sessions. He just wouldn’t leave."[22] In ninth grade, he shifted to Saviour Convent in Paschim Vihar to help his cricket practice.[18] Apart from sports, Kohli was good at academics as well, and his teachers remember him as "a bright and alert child".[23] Kohli's family lived in Meera Bagh until 2015 when they moved to Gurgaon.[24]

Kohli's father died on 18 December 2006 due to a stroke after being bed-ridden for a month.[18] Regarding his early life, Kohli has said in an interview, "I've seen a lot in life. Losing my father at a young age, the family business not doing too well, staying in a rented place. There were tough times for the family... It's all embedded in my memory."[25] According to Kohli, his father supported his cricket training during his childhood, "My father was my biggest support. He was the one who drove me to practice every day. I miss his presence sometimes."[26]

Youth and domestic career

A younger, chubbier Kohli as seen in this photo from 2010. His chubby appearance in his childhood and early professional years earned him the nickname "Cheeku".
Kohli first played for Delhi Under-15 team in October 2002 in the 2002–03 Polly Umrigar Trophy. He was the leading run-getter for his team in that tournament with 172 runs at an average of 34.40.[27] He became the captain of the team for the 2003–04 Polly Umrigar Trophy[28] and scored 390 runs in 5 innings at an average of 78 including two centuries and two fifties.[29] In late 2004, he was selected in the Delhi Under-17 team for the 2003–04 Vijay Merchant Trophy. He scored 470 runs in four matches at an average of 117.50 with two hundreds and top-score of 251*.[30] Delhi Under-17s won the 2004–05 Vijay Merchant Trophy in which Kohli finished as the highest run-scorer with 757 runs from 7 matches at an average of 84.11 with two centuries.[31] In February 2006, he made his List A debut for Delhi against Services but did not get to bat.[32]

In July 2006, Kohli was selected in the India Under-19 squad on its tour of England. He averaged 105 in the three-match ODI series against England Under-19s[33] and 49 in the three-match Test series.[34] India Under-19 went on to win both the series. At the conclusion of the tour, the India Under-19 coach Lalchand Rajput was impressed with Kohli and said, "Kohli showed strong technical skills against both pace and spin".[35] In September, the India Under-19 team toured Pakistan. Kohli averaged 58 in the Test series[36] and 41.66 in the ODI series against Pakistan Under-19s.[37]

"The way I approached the game changed that day. I just had one thing in my mind - that I have to play for my country and live that dream for my dad."
— Kohli on his innings against Karnataka.[38]
Kohli made his first-class debut for Delhi against Tamil Nadu in November 2006, at the age of 18, and scored 10 in his debut innings. He came into the spotlight in December when he decided to play for his team against Karnataka on the day after his father's death and went on to score 90.[39] He went directly to the funeral after he was dismissed. Delhi captain Mithun Manhas said, "That is an act of great commitment to the team and his innings turned out to be crucial," while coach Chetan Chauhan lauded Kohli's "attitude and determination."[40] His mother noted that "Virat changed a bit after that day. Overnight he became a much more matured person. He took every match seriously. He hated being on the bench. It's as if his life hinged totally on cricket after that day. Now, he looked like he was chasing his father's dream which was his own too."[18] He scored a total of 257 runs from 6 matches at an average of 36.71 in that season.[41]

In April 2007, he made his Twenty20 debut and finished as the highest run-getter for his team in the Inter-State T20 Championship with 179 runs at an average of 35.80.[42] In July–August 2007, the India Under-19 team toured Sri Lanka. In the triangular series against Sri Lanka Under-19s and Bangladesh Under-19s, Kohli was the second highest run-getter with 146 runs from 5 matches.[43] In the two-match Test series that followed, he scored 244 runs at an average of 122 including a hundred and a fifty.[44]

"He is a very physical type of player. He likes to impose himself on the game, backs it up with his skill."
— India's coach at the 2008 Under-19 World Cup Dav Whatmore on Kohli.[38]
In February–March 2008, Kohli captained the victorious Indian team at the 2008 ICC Under-19 Cricket World Cup held in Malaysia. Batting at number 3, he scored 235 runs in 6 matches at an average of 47 and finished as the tournament's third-highest run-getter and one of the three batsmen to score a hundred in the tournament.[45] His century (100 runs from 74 balls) against the West Indies Under-19s in the group stage, which was called "the innings of the tournament" by ESPNcricinfo,[46] gave India a 50-run victory and earned Kohli the man of the match. Kohli picked up a leg injury during the match, but recovered in time to play the quarterfinal match against England Under-19s.[47] He was instrumental in India's three-wicket semifinal win over New Zealand Under-19s in which he took 2/27 and scored 43 in the tense run-chase and was awarded the man of the match.[48] He scored 19 against South Africa Under-19s in the final which India won by 12 runs (D/L method). ESPNcricinfo commended him for making several tactical bowling changes during the tournament.[46]


Virat Kohli at Greenfield International Stadium, Trivandrum during ODI match with West Indies team on 1st November 2018
Following the Under-19 World Cup, Kohli was bought by the Indian Premier League franchise Royal Challengers Bangalore for $30,000 on a youth contract.[49] In June 2008, Kohli and his Under-19 teammates Pradeep Sangwan and Tanmay Srivastava were awarded the Border-Gavaskar scholarship. The scholarship allowed the three players to train for six weeks at Cricket Australia's Centre of Excellence in Brisbane.[45] In July 2008, he was included in India's 30-man probable squad for the ICC Champions Trophy which was to be held in Pakistan in September 2008.[50] He was also picked in the India Emerging Players squad for the four-team Emerging Players Tournament in Australia. He was in fine form in that tournament and scored 206 runs in six matches at an average of 41.20.[51]

International career
Early years
In August 2008, Kohli was included in the Indian ODI squad for tour of Sri Lanka and the Champions Trophy in Pakistan. Prior to the Sri Lankan tour, Kohli had played only eight List A matches,[52] and his selection was called a "surprise call-up".[53] During the Sri Lankan tour, as both first-choice openers Sachin Tendulkar and Virender Sehwag were injured, Kohli batted as a makeshift opener throughout the series. He made his international debut, at the age of 19, in the first ODI of the tour and was dismissed for 12.[54] He made his first ODI half century, a score of 54, in the fourth match which helped India win the series.[54] He had scores of 37, 25 and 31 in the other three matches.[54] India won the series 3–2 which was India's first ODI series win against Sri Lanka in Sri Lanka.

After the Champions Trophy was postponed to 2009, Kohli was picked as a replacement for the injured Shikhar Dhawan in the India A squad for the unofficial Tests against Australia A in September 2008.[55] He batted only once in the two-match series, and scored 49 in that innings.[56] Later that month in September 2008, he played for Delhi in the Nissar Trophy against SNGPL (winners of Quaid-i-Azam Trophy from Pakistan) and top-scored for Delhi in both innings, with 52 and 197.[57] The match was drawn but SNGPL won the trophy on first-innings lead.[58] In October 2008, Kohli played for Indian Board President's XI in a four-day tour match against Australia. He made 105 and 16* in that match against a bowling line-up consisting of Brett Lee, Stuart Clark, Mitchell Johnson, Peter Siddle and Jason Krejza.[59]

Kohli was included in the squad for the home ODI series against England in November 2008 but was not given a chance to play, due to the inclusion of Tendulkar and Sehwag in the team.[60] In December 2008, Kohli was given a Grade D contract in the annual BCCI contracts list which entitled him to receive Rs 15 lakh.[61] He was then dropped from the squad for the five-match ODI series in Sri Lanka against Sri Lanka in January 2009.

Kohli was selected in the four-team Emerging Players Tournament in July–August 2009 held in Australia. He opened the innings for India Emerging Players in that tournament and finished as the leading run-getter with 398 runs from seven matches at an average of 66.33.[62] He scored 104 off 102 balls in the final against South Africa Emerging Players at Brisbane to help his team win the match by 17 runs and clinch the title.[63] At the conclusion of the tournament, Kris Srikkanth, the chairman of the national selection committee, was impressed with Kohli and remarked "I must say, opener Virat Kohli was outstanding. Some of the shots he played spoke about his ability."[64] Kohli has called this tournament as the "turning point" of his career.[65]

Kohli returned to the national team replacing the injured Gautam Gambhir in the Indian squad for the tri-series in Sri Lanka.[66] He batted at number 4 for India in the 2009 ICC Champions Trophy because of an injury to Yuvraj Singh. In the inconsequential group match against the West Indies, Kohli scored an unbeaten 79 in India's successful chase of 130 and won his first man of the match award.[67] Kohli played as a reserve batsman in the seven-match home ODI series against Australia, appearing in two matches as injury replacement. He found a place in the home ODI series against Sri Lanka in December 2009 and scored 27 and 54 in the first two ODIs before making way for Yuvraj who regained fitness for the third ODI. However, Yuvraj's finger injury recurred leading to him being ruled out indefinitely.[68] Kohli returned to the team in the fourth ODI at Kolkata and scored his first ODI century–107 off 111 balls–sharing a 224-run partnership for the third wicket with Gambhir, who made his personal best score of 150. India won by seven wickets to seal the series 3–1.[54] The man of the match was awarded to Gambhir who gave the award to Kohli.[69]

Tendulkar was rested for the tri-nation ODI tournament in Bangladesh in January 2010, which enabled Kohli to play in each of India's five matches. Against Bangladesh, he scored 91 to help secure a win after India collapsed to 51/3 early in their run-chase of 297.[54] In the next match against Sri Lanka, Kohli ended unbeaten on 71 to help India win the match with a bonus point having chased down their target of 214 within 33 overs. The next day, he scored his second ODI century, against Bangladesh, bringing up the mark with the winning runs.[70] He became only the third Indian batsman to score two ODI centuries before their 22nd birthday, after Tendulkar and Suresh Raina.[71] Kohli was much praised for his performances during the series[65][72] in particular by the Indian captain Dhoni.[73] Although Kohli made only two runs in the final against Sri Lanka in a four-wicket Indian defeat,[54] he finished as the leading run-getter of the series with 275 runs from five innings at an average of 91.66.[74] In the three-match ODI series at home against South Africa in February, Kohli batted in two games and had scores of 31 and 57.[54]

Rise through the ranks
Raina was named captain and Kohli vice-captain for the tri-series against Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe in Zimbabwe in May–June 2010, as many first-choice players skipped the tour. Kohli made 168 runs at 42.00 including two fifties,[75] but India suffered three defeats in four matches and crashed out of the series. During the series, Kohli became the fastest Indian batsman to reach 1,000 runs in ODI cricket.[76] He made his T20I debut against Zimbabwe at Harare and scored an unbeaten 26.[77] Later that month, Kohli batted at 3 in a full-strength Indian team throughout the 2010 Asia Cup and scored a total of 67 runs at an average of 16.75.[78] His struggles with form continued in the tri-series against Sri Lanka and New Zealand in Sri Lanka where he averaged 15.


Kohli batting in an ODI against New Zealand in December 2010.
Despite the poor run of form, Kohli was retained in the ODI squad for a three-match series against Australia in October, and in the only completed match of the series at Visakhapatnam, scored his third ODI century–118 off 121 balls–which helped India reach the target of 290 after losing the openers early.[79] Winning the man of the match, he admitted that he was under pressure to keep his place in the team after failures in the two previous series.[80] Part of a largely inexperienced team for the home ODI series against New Zealand, Kohli scored a match-winning 104-ball 105, his fourth ODI hundred and second in succession, in the first game,[81] and followed it up with 64 and 63* in the next two matches.[54] India completed a 5–0 whitewash of New Zealand, while Kohli's performance in the series helped him become a regular in the ODI team[82] and made him a strong contender for a spot in India's World Cup squad.[83] He was India's leading run-scorer in ODIs in 2010, with 995 runs from 25 matches at an average of 47.38 including three centuries.[84]

2011 Cricket World Cup
Main article: 2011 Cricket World Cup
Kohli was India's leading run-getter in the five-match ODI series of the South African tour in January 2011, with 193 runs at an average of 48.25 including two fifties, both in Indian defeats.[85] During the series, he jumped to number two spot on the ICC Rankings for ODI batsmen,[86] and was named in India's 15-man squad for the World Cup.[87] The inclusion of both Kohli and Raina in the World Cup squad resulted in speculations about which of the two batsmen will make it to the playing eleven. Days before India's first match of the tournament, Indian captain Dhoni indicated that the in-form Kohli is likely to be preferred over Raina.[86]

Kohli played in every match of India's successful World Cup campaign. He scored an unbeaten 100, his fifth ODI century, in the first match against Bangladesh and became the first Indian batsman to score a century on World Cup debut.[88] In the next four group matches he had low scores of 8, 34, 12 and 1 against England, Ireland, Netherlands and South Africa respectively. Having returned to form with 59 against the West Indies, he scored only 24 and 9 in the quarterfinal against Australia and semifinal against Pakistan respectively.[54] In the final against Sri Lanka at Mumbai, he scored 35, sharing an 83-run partnership with Gambhir for the third wicket after India had lost both openers within the seventh over chasing 275.[89] This partnership is regarded as "one of the turning points in the match",[90] as India went on to win the match by six wickets and lift the World Cup for the first time since 1983.[91]

Consistent performance in limited overs

Kohli fielding during a match in December 2010.
When India toured the West Indies in June–July 2011, they chose a largely inexperienced squad, resting Tendulkar and others such as Gambhir and Sehwag missing out due to injuries. Kohli was one of three uncapped players in the Test squad.[92] Kohli found success in the ODI series which India won 3–2, with a total of 199 runs at an average of 39.80.[93] His best efforts came in the second ODI at Port of Spain where he won the man of the match for his score of 81 which gave India a seven-wicket victory,[94] and the fifth ODI at Kingston where his innings of 94 came in a seven-wicket defeat.[54] Kohli made his Test debut at Kingston in the first match of the Test series that followed. He batted at 5 and was dismissed for 4 and 15 caught behind by Fidel Edwards in both innings.[95] India went on to win the Test series 1–0 but Kohli amassed just 76 runs from five innings,[96] struggling against the short ball[97] and was particularly troubled by the fast bowling of Edwards, who dismissed him three times in the series.[98]

Initially dropped from the Test squad for India's four-match series in England in July and August, Kohli was recalled as replacement for the injured Yuvraj,[99] though did not play in any match in the series. He found moderate success in the subsequent ODI series in which he averaged 38.80.[100] His score of 55 in the first ODI at Chester-le-Street was followed by a string of low scores in the next three matches.[54] In the last game of the series, Kohli scored his sixth ODI hundred–107 runs off 93 balls–and shared a 170-run third-wicket partnership with Rahul Dravid, who was playing his last ODI, to help India post their first 300-plus total of the tour.[101] Kohli was dismissed hit wicket in that innings which was the only century in the series by any player on either team and earned him praise for his "hard work" and "maturity".[102] However, England won the match by D/L method and the series 3–0.

In October 2011, Kohli was the leading run-scorer of the five-match home ODI series against England which India won 5–0. He scored a total of 270 runs across five matches including unbeaten knocks of 112 from 98 balls at Delhi, where he put on an unbroken 209-run partnership with Gambhir,[103] and 86 at Mumbai, both in successful run-chases.[54] Owing to his ODI success, Kohli was included, ahead of Raina, in the Test squad to face the West Indies in November. In competition with Yuvraj Singh for the number six position,[104] it was not until the final match of the series that Kohli was selected in the team. He scored a pair of fifties in the match,[95] with his first innings score of 52 ensuring India avoided follow-on.[105] India won the subsequent ODI series 4–1 in which Kohli managed to accumulate 243 runs at 60.75.[106] During the series, Kohli scored his eighth ODI century and his second at Visakhapatnam, where he made 117 off 123 balls in India's run-chase of 271,[107] a knock which raised his reputation as "an expert of the chase".[108] Kohli ended up as the leading run-getter in ODIs for the year 2011, with 1381 runs from 34 matches at 47.62 and four centuries.[109]

Ascension to ODI vice-captaincy
Having found a place in India's Test squad for the tour of Australia in December 2011, Kohli top-scored with 132 in a tour match against Cricket Australia Chairman's XI to strengthen his case for a spot in the playing eleven ahead of Rohit Sharma.[110] Batting at number 6, Kohli failed to go past 25 in the first two Tests, as his defensive technique was exposed.[111][95] While fielding on the boundary during the second day of the second match, he gestured to the crowd with his middle finger for which he was fined 50% of his match fee by the match referee. He top-scored in each of India's innings in the third Test at Perth, with 44 and 75, even as India surrendered to their second consecutive innings defeat.[112] In the fourth and final match at Adelaide, Kohli scored his maiden Test century of 116 runs in the first innings; it was the only century scored by an Indian in the series.[113] India suffered a 0–4 whitewash and Kohli, India's top run-scorer in the series, was described as "the lone bright spot in an otherwise nightmare visit for the tourists".[114]


Kohli fielding during a CB Series match against Australia in February 2012.
In the first seven matches of the Commonwealth Bank triangular series against hosts Australia and Sri Lanka, Kohli made two fifties–77 at Perth and 66 at Brisbane–both against Sri Lanka.[54] India registered two wins, a tie and four losses in these seven matches, which meant that they needed a bonus point win their last group match against Sri Lanka at Hobart, to stay in contention for qualifying for the finals series.[115] Being set a target of 321 by Sri Lanka, Kohli came to the crease with India's score at 86/2 and went on to score 133 not out from 86 balls to take India to a comfortable win with 13 overs to spare.[116] India earned a bonus point with the win and Kohli was named Man of the Match for his knock, which included scoring 24 runs in an over by Lasith Malinga.[117] Former Australian cricketer and commentator Dean Jones rated Kohli's innings as "one of the greatest ODI knocks of all time".[118] However, Sri Lanka beat Australia three days later in their last group fixture and knocked India out of the series.[119] With 373 runs at 53.28, Kohli once again finished as India's highest run-scorer and lone centurion of the series.[120]

Kohli was appointed the vice-captain for the 2012 Asia Cup in Bangladesh on the back of his fine performance in Australia. Kris Srikkanth, the chairman of selectors, told reporters, "Hats off to Virat Kohli for the way he played. We have to start looking towards the future. The selection committee and the Board felt Kohli is future captaincy material."[121] Kohli was in fine form during the tournament, finishing as the leading run-scorer with 357 runs at an average of 119.[122] He scored 108 in the opening match against Sri Lanka in a 50-run Indian victory,[123] while India lost their next match to Bangladesh in which he made 66.[54] In the final group stage match against Pakistan, he scored a personal best 183 off 148 balls, his 11th ODI century. Coming in at 0/1, he struck 22 fours and a six in his innings to help India to chase down 330, their highest successful ODI run-chase at the time.[124][125] His knock was the highest individual score in Asia Cup history, the joint-second highest score in an ODI run-chase and the highest individual score against Pakistan in ODIs surpassing previous record of 156 by Brian Lara.[126] Kohli was awarded the man of the match in both matches that India won, but India could not progress to the final of the tournament.

In July–August 2012, Kohli struck two centuries in the five-match ODI tour of Sri Lanka–106 off 113 balls at Hambantota and 128* off 119 balls at Colombo–winning man of the match in both games.[127][128] India won the series 4–1 and on account of scoring the most number of runs in the series, Kohli was named player of the series.[129] In the one-off T20I that followed, he scored a 48-ball 68, his first T20I fifty, and won the player of the series award.[130] Kohli scored his second Test century at Bangalore during New Zealand's tour of India and won his first man of the match award in Test cricket.[131] India won the two-match series 2–0, and Kohli averaged 106 with one hundred and two fifties from three innings.[132] In the subsequent T20I series, he scored 70 runs off 41 balls, but India lost the match by one run and the series 1–0.[77] He continued to be in good form during the 2012 ICC World Twenty20 in Sri Lanka, with 185 runs from 5 matches at an average of 46.25.[133] He hit two fifties during the tournament, 50 against Afghanistan in the group stage[134] and 78* against Pakistan in the Super Eights, winning man of the match for both innings.[135]

Kohli's Test form dipped during the first three matches of England's tour of India with a top score of 20 and England leading the series 2–1.[95] He scored a patient 103 from 295 balls in the last match on a slow and low pitch at Nagpur,[136] keeping India in contention of drawing the series. ESPNcricinfo praised Kohli for having "demonstrated his growing maturity to play just the sort of innings his side required",[137] while Kohli described his knock as "a learning innings".[138] However, the match ended in a draw and England won their first Test series in India in 28 years.[139] Against Pakistan in December 2012, Kohli averaged 18 in the T20Is[140] and 4.33 in the ODIs,[141] being troubled by the fast bowlers, particularly Junaid Khan, who dismissed him on all three occasions in the ODI series.[142] Kohli had a quiet ODI series against England, apart from a match-winning 77* in the third ODI at Ranchi,[143] with a total of 155 runs at an average of 38.75.[144]

"I love watching Virat Kohli bat. He looks to me like an individual of my own heart. I love his aggression, and [he has] serious passion that I used to have. He reminds me of myself."
— Former West Indies captain Sir Viv Richards on Kohli.[145]
Kohli scored his fourth Test century (107) at Chennai in the first match of the home Test series against Australia in February 2013. He said he was "feeling hungry for this series" after a poor run of form in the two previous series and also disappointed on getting out soon after reaching the hundred-run mark.[146] India completed a 4–0 series sweep, becoming the first team to whitewash Australia in more than four decades.[147] Kohli averaged 56.80 in the series and cemented his spot in the Test team.[148]

2013 ICC Champions Trophy
Main article: 2013 ICC Champions Trophy

Kohli batting against South Africa in Cardiff during the Champions Trophy in June 2013.
In June 2013, Kohli featured in the ICC Champions Trophy in England which India won. He scored a match-winning 144 against Sri Lanka in a warm-up match.[149] He scored 34, 22 and 22 not out in India's group matches against South Africa, West Indies and Pakistan respectively, while India qualified for the semifinals with an undefeated record. In the semifinal against Sri Lanka at Cardiff, he struck 58 not out in an eight-wicket win for India.[54] The final between India and England at Birmingham was reduced to 20 overs after a rain delay. India batted first and Kohli top-scored with 43 from 34 balls, sharing a sixth-wicket partnership of 47 runs off 33 balls with Ravindra Jadeja and helping India reach 129/7 in 20 overs. India went on to secure a five-run win and their second consecutive ICC ODI tournament victory.[150]

Setting records
Kohli stood-in as the captain for the first ODI of the triangular series in the West Indies after Dhoni injured himself during the match. India lost the match by one wicket, and Dhoni was subsequently ruled out of the series with Kohli being named the captain for the remaining matches.[151] In his second match as captain, Kohli scored his first hundred as captain, making 102 off 83 balls against the West Indies at Port of Spain in a bonus point win for India.[152] Many senior players including Dhoni were rested for the five-match ODI tour of Zimbabwe in July 2013, with Kohli being appointed captain for an entire series for the first time.[153] In the first game of the series at Harare, he struck 115 runs from 108 balls, helping India chase down the target of 229 and winning the man of the match award.[154] He batted on two more occasions in the series in which he had scores of 14 and 58 not out. India completed a 5–0 sweep of the series; their first in an away ODI series.[155]

Kohli had a successful time with the bat in the seven-match ODI series against Australia. After top-scoring with 61 in the opening loss at Pune, he struck the fastest century by an Indian in ODIs in the second match at Jaipur. Reaching the milestone in just 52 balls and putting up an unbroken 186-run second-wicket partnership with Rohit Sharma that came in 17.2 overs,[156] Kohli's innings of 100 not out helped India chase down the target of 360 for the loss of one wicket with more than six overs to spare. This chase was the second-highest successful run-chase in ODI cricket, while Kohli's knock became the fastest hundred against Australia and the third-fastest in a run-chase.[157] He followed that innings with 68 in the next match at Mohali in another Indian defeat,[54] before the next two matches were washed out by rain. In the sixth ODI at Nagpur, he struck 115 off only 66 balls to help India successfully chase the target of 351 and level the series 2–2 and won the man of the match.[158] He reached the 100-run mark in 61 balls, making it the third-fastest ODI century by an Indian batsman, and also became the fastest batsman in the world to score 17 hundreds in ODI cricket.[159] India clinched the series after winning the last match in which he was run out for a duck. At the conclusion of the series, Kohli moved to the top position in the ICC ODI batsmen rankings for the first time in his career.[3]

Kohli batted twice in the two-match Test series against the West Indies, and had scores of 3 and 57 being dismissed by Shane Shillingford in both innings. This was also the last Test series for Tendulkar and Kohli was expected to take Tendulkar's number 4 batting position after the series.[160] In the first game of the three-match ODI series that followed at Kochi, Kohli made 86 to seal a six-wicket win and won the man of the match.[161] During the match, he also equalled Viv Richards' record of becoming the fastest batsman to make 5,000 runs in ODI cricket, reaching the landmark in his 114th innings.[162] He missed out on his third century at Visakhapatnam in the next match, after being dismissed for 99 playing a hook shot off Ravi Rampaul.[163] India lost the match by two wickets, but took the series 2–1 after winning the last match at Kanpur.[164] With 204 runs at 68.00, Kohli finished the series as the leading run-getter and was awarded the man of the series.[165]

Overseas season
India toured South Africa in December 2013 for three ODIs and two Tests. Kohli averaged 15.50 in the ODIs, including a duck.[166] In the first Test at Johannesburg, playing his first Test in South Africa[167] and batting at 4 for the first time,[95] Kohli scored 119 and 96. His hundred was the first by a subcontinent batsman at the venue since 1998.[168] Regarding Kohli's hundred, South Africa bowling coach Allan Donald said, "The one word that comes to my mind is responsibility. I think he [Kohli] showed great discipline and responsibility. It reminds me of Sachin Tendulkar when they came here in 1996."[169] The match ended in a draw, and Kohli was awarded man of the match.[170] India failed to win a single match on the tour, losing the second Test by 10 wickets in which he made 46 and 11.[95]

"Kohli is the next chosen one. He exudes the intensity of Dravid, the audacity of Sehwag, and the extraordinary range of Tendulkar. That doesn't make him better, simply sui generis, his own unique kind."
— Former New Zealand captain Martin Crowe on Kohli.[171]
Kohli continued to amass runs on the subsequent New Zealand tour. He averaged 58.21 in the five-match ODI series[172] in which his efforts of 111-ball 123 at Napier, 65-ball 78 at Hamilton and 78-ball 82 at Wellington[54] all went in vain as India were defeated 4–0. He made 214 runs at 71.33 in the two-match Test series that followed[173] including an unbeaten 105 on the last day of the second Test at Wellington that helped India save the match.[174]

India then travelled to Bangladesh for the Asia Cup and World Twenty20. Dhoni was ruled out of the Asia Cup after suffering a side strain during the New Zealand tour, which led to Kohli being named the captain for the tournament.[175] Kohli scored 136 off 122 balls in India's opening match against Bangladesh, sharing a 213-run third-wicket stand with Ajinkya Rahane, which helped India successfully chase 280.[176] It was his 19th ODI century and his fifth in Bangladesh, making him the batsman with most ODI centuries in Bangladesh.[177] India were knocked out of the tournament after narrow losses against Sri Lanka and Pakistan, in which Kohli scored 48 and 5 respectively.[54]

2014 ICC World Twenty20
Main article: 2014 ICC World Twenty20
Dhoni returned from injury to captain the team for 2014 ICC World Twenty20 and Kohli was named vice-captain. In India's opening match of the tournament against Pakistan, Kohli top-scored with 36 not out to guide India to a seven-wicket win. He scored 54 off 41 balls in the next game against West Indies and an unbeaten 57 from 50 balls against Bangladesh, both in successful run-chases.[77] In the semifinal, he made an unbeaten 72 in 44 deliveries to help India achieve the target of 173 with six wickets and five balls to spare.[178] He won the man of the match for this knock which he called "my best T20 innings".[179] India posted 130/4 in the final against Sri Lanka, in which Kohli scored 77 from 58 balls, and eventually lost the match by six wickets.[180] Kohli had made a total of 319 runs in the tournament at an average of 106.33, a record for most runs by an individual batsman in a single World Twenty20 tournament,[181] for which he won the Man of the Tournament award.[180]

2014 England tour failure and subsequent tours
Main article: Indian cricket team in England in 2014
Kohli and other senior players were rested for India's tour of Bangladesh ahead of the England tour. India conceded a 3–1 defeat in the five-match Test series against England despite leading it 1–0 after the first two Tests. Kohli fared poorly in the series averaging just 13.40 in 10 innings with a top score of 39.[182] He was dismissed for single-digit scores on six occasions in the series and was particularly susceptible to the swinging ball on off stump line, being dismissed several times edging the ball to the wicket-keeper or slip fielders. Man of the series James Anderson got Kohli's wicket four times,[183] while Kohli's batting technique was questioned by analysts and former cricketers.[184][185] Geoffrey Boycott said, "Jimmy Anderson ate him for breakfast. Every time Kohli came in, all he did was bowl at off stump, around the corridor of uncertainty and Kohli nicked it. He is playing with his bat too far away from his pad. He has to look at video replays of his technique and get back to basics".[186] India won the ODI series that followed 3–1, but Kohli's struggles with the bat continued with an average of 18 in four innings.[187] In the one-off T20I, he scored 41-ball 66, his first fifty-plus score of the tour on the last match of the tour.[77] India lost the match by three runs, but Kohli reached the number one spot for T20I batsmen in the ICC rankings.[188]

Kohli had a successful time during India's home ODI series win over the West Indies in October 2014. His 62 in the second ODI at Delhi was his first fifty across Tests and ODIs in 16 innings since February,[189] and he stated that he got his "confidence back" with the innings.[190] He struck his 20th ODI hundred–127 runs in 114 balls–in the fourth match at Dharamsala. India registered a 59-run victory and Kohli was awarded man of the match.[191] Dhoni was rested for the five-match ODI series against Sri Lanka in November, enabling Kohli to lead the team for another full series. Kohli batted at 4 throughout the series and made scores of 22, 49, 53 and 66 in the first four ODIs, with India leading the series 4–0. In the fifth ODI at Ranchi, Kohli came in to bat with India at 14/2 in pursuit of 287. He made an unbeaten 139 off 126 balls to give his team a three-wicket win and a whitewash of Sri Lanka.[192] Kohli was awarded player of the series, and it was the second whitewash under his captaincy.[193] During the series he became the fastest batsman in the world to go past the 6000-run mark in ODIs.[194] With 1054 ODI runs at 58.55 in 2014, he became the second player in the world after Sourav Ganguly to make more than 1,000 runs in ODIs for four consecutive calendar years.[195]

Test captaincy

Kohli with coach Duncan Fletcher in January 2015, before the fourth Test in Sydney.
For the first Test of the Australian tour in December 2014, Dhoni was not part of the Indian team at Adelaide due to an injury, and Kohli took the reins as Test captain for the first time.[196] Kohli scored 115 in India's first innings, becoming the fourth Indian to score a hundred on Test captaincy debut.[197] In their second innings, India were set a target of 364 to be scored on the fifth day. Kohli came in to bat when the Indian innings was reduced to 57/2 and started batting aggressively. He put on 185 runs for the third wicket with Murali Vijay before Vijay's dismissal, which triggered a batting collapse. From 242/2, India was bowled out for 315 with Kohli's 141 off 175 balls being the top score.[198] Kohli noted that his team was looking for a win and not a draw, while also saying that it was "the best Test I have been part of".[199] Kohli's second innings ton was hailed by several Australian commentators as the finest fourth-innings performance they had ever seen in Australia.[200]

Dhoni returned to the team as captain for the second match at Brisbane where Kohli scored 19 and 1 in a four-wicket defeat for India.[95] In the Melbourne Boxing Day Test, Kohli was India's top-scorer in both innings. He made his personal best Test score of 169 in the first innings while sharing a 262-run partnership with Rahane, India's biggest partnership outside Asia in ten years.[201] Kohli followed it with a score of 54 in India's second innings on the fifth day, helping his team draw the Test match.[95] Dhoni announced his retirement from Test cricket at the conclusion of this match, and Kohli was appointed as the full-time Test captain ahead of the fourth Test at Sydney.[202] Captaining the Test team for the second time, Kohli hit 147 in the first innings of the match and became the first batsman in Test cricket history to score three hundreds in his first three innings as Test captain.[203] He was dismissed for 46 in the second innings and India hung in for another draw.[204] Kohli's total of 692 runs in four Tests was the most by any Indian batsman in a Test series in Australia.[203]

In January 2015, India failed to win a single match in the tri-nation ODI series against the hosts Australia and England. Kohli was unable to replicate his Test success in ODIs, failing to make a two-digit score in any of the four games.[54] Kohli's ODI form did not improve in the lead-up to the World Cup, with scores of 18 and 5 in the warm-up matches against Australia and Afghanistan respectively.

2015 Cricket World Cup
Main article: 2015 Cricket World Cup

Kohli batting against the UAE in Perth during a group stage match of the 2015 World Cup.
In the first match of the World Cup against Pakistan at Adelaide, Kohli hit 107 in 126 balls, sharing 100-plus partnerships with both Dhawan and Raina, to help India set a total of 300 and win the match by 76 runs. For his knock, he was awarded the man of the match award, his 20th in ODIs and first in a World Cup match.[205] He was dismissed for 46 in India's second match against South Africa after another century partnership with opening batsman Dhawan. India went on to post 307 in 50 overs and register a 130-run victory in the match. India batted second in their remaining four group matches in which Kohli scored 33*, 33, 44* and 38 against UAE, West Indies, Ireland and Zimbabwe respectively.[54] India went on to secure wins in these four fixtures and top the Pool B points with an undefeated record.[206] In India's 109-run victory in the quarterfinal over Bangladesh, Kohli was dismissed by Rubel Hossain for 3 edging the ball to the wicket-keeper. India was eliminated in the semifinal by Australia at Melbourne, where Kohli was dismissed for 1 off 13 balls, top-edging a short-pitched delivery from Mitchell Johnson.[54]

Purple patch after world cup
Kohli had a slump in form when India toured Bangladesh in June 2015. He contributed only 14 in the one-off Test which ended in a draw and averaged 16.33 in the ODI series which Bangladesh won 2–1.[207] Kohli ended his streak of low scores by scoring his 11th Test hundred in the first Test of the Sri Lankan tour which India lost. India came back and won the next two matches to seal the series 2–1, Kohli's first series win as Test captain and India's first away Test series win in four years.[208]

During South Africa's tour of India, Kohli became the fastest batsman in the world to make 1,000 runs in T20I cricket, reaching the milestone in his 27th innings.[209] In the ODI series, he made 77 at Rajkot and a match-winning 138 in the fourth ODI at Chennai that helped India draw level in the series.[210] India lost the series after a defeat in the final ODI and Kohli finished the series with an average of 49.[211] India came back to beat the top-ranked South African team 3–0 in the four-match Test series under Kohli's captaincy, and climbed to number two position on the ICC Test rankings.[212] He scored a total of 200 runs in the series at 33.33, including 44 and 88 in the fourth match at Delhi.[95]

No. 1 Test team and limited-overs captaincy
Kohli started 2016 with scores of 91 and 59 in the first two ODIs of the limited-overs tour of Australia. He followed it up with a pair of hundreds–a run-a-ball 117 at Melbourne and 106 from 92 balls at Canberra–in the next two matches. During the course of the series, he became the fastest batsman in the world to cross the 7000-run mark in ODIs, getting to the milestone in his 161st innings, and the fastest to get to 25 centuries. After the ODI series ended in a 1–4 loss, the Indian team came back to whitewash the Australians 3–0 in the T20I series. Kohli made fifties in all three T20Is with scores of 90 not out,[213] 59 not out[214] and 50, winning two man of the matches as well as the man of the series award.[215] He was also instrumental in India winning the Asia Cup in Bangladesh the following month in which he scored 49 in a run-chase of 84 against Pakistan,[216] followed by an unbeaten 56 against Sri Lanka and 41 not out in the Final against Bangladesh in two more successful chases.[217]

Kohli maintained his match-winning form in the 2016 ICC World Twenty20 in India, scoring 55 not out in another successful run-chase against Pakistan.[218] He struck an unbeaten 82 from 51 balls in India's must-win group match against Australia in "an innings of sheer class" with "clean cricket shots".[219][220] The knock helped India win by six wickets and register a spot in the semifinal; Kohli went on to rate the innings as his best in the format.[221] In the semifinal, Kohli top-scored once again with an unbeaten 89 from 47 deliveries, but West Indies overhauled India's total of 192 and ended India's campaign. His total of 273 runs in five matches at an average of 136.50 earned him his second consecutive Man of the Tournament award at the World Twenty20.[222]

Playing his first Test in the West Indies since his debut series, Kohli scored 200 in the first Test at Antigua to ensure an innings-and-92-run win for India, their biggest win ever outside of Asia. It was his first double hundred in first-class cricket and the first made away from home by an Indian captain in Tests.[223] India went on to wrap the series 2–0 and briefly top the ICC Test Rankings before being displaced by Pakistan at the position. He scored another double hundred–211 at Indore in the third Test against New Zealand–as India's 3–0 whitewash victory saw them regain the top position in the ICC Test Rankings.[224] In the subsequent ODI series, Kohli set up two wins for India batting second with unbeaten knocks of 85 at Dharamsala and 134-ball 154 at Mohali.[225] He then made 65 in the series-deciding fifth game at Visakhapatnam which India won.


Kohli batting against West Indies in 2017
Kohli got double centuries in the next two Test series against England and Bangladesh, making him the first batsman ever to score double centuries in four consecutive series. He broke the record of Australian great Donald Bradman and fellow Indian Rahul Dravid, both of whom had managed to get three. Against England, he got his then-highest Test score of 235.[226]

2017 ICC Champions Trophy
Main article: 2017 ICC Champions Trophy Final
Virat Kohli got the chance to captain in an ICC tournament for the first time in the 2017 ICC Champions Trophy. In the semi-final against Bangladesh, Kohli scored 96*, thus becoming the fastest batsman, in terms of innings, to reach 8,000 runs in ODIs in 175 innings.[227] In the captaincy of Virat Kohli, the Indian cricket team reached the finals, but lost to Pakistan Cricket team by 180 runs. During this Kohli and his team showed good game. In the third over of Indian innings, Virat Kohli was dropped in the slips for just five runs but caught the next ball by Shadab Khan at point on the bowling of Mohammad Amir.[228]

10,000 runs in ODIs before age of 30
He followed it up with ODI centuries against the West Indies and Sri Lanka in consecutive series, equalling Ricky Ponting's tally of 30 ODI centuries.[229][230][231] In October 2017, he was adjourned the ODI player of the series against New Zealand for scoring two ODI centuries, during the course of which he made a new record for the most runs (8,888), best average (55.55) and highest number of centuries (31) for any batsman when completing 200 ODIs.[232][233] Kohli made several more records during the 3 match Test series against Sri Lanka at home in November. After scoring a century and a double century in the first two Tests, he ended up scoring yet another double century in the third Test, during which he became the eleventh Indian batsman to surpass 5000 runs in Test cricket while scoring his 20th Test century and 6th double century.[234] During this match he also became the first batsman to score six double hundreds as a captain.[235] With 610 runs in the series, Kohli also became the highest run-scorer by an Indian in a three-match Test series and the fourth-highest overall.[236] India comfortably won the three-match series 1–0 and Kohli was adjudged man of the match for the second and third Test matches and player of the series. With this win, India equalled Australia for the record streak of nine consecutive series wins in Test cricket.[237] He ended the year with 2818 international runs, which is recorded as the third-highest tally ever in a calendar year and the highest tally ever by an Indian player.[236]

Kohli fared average in the Test matches as India lost 1–2 during the South Africa tour in January–February 2018, but came back strongly to score 558 runs in the 6 ODIs, making a record for the highest runs scored in a bilateral ODI series.[238] This included three centuries, remaining unbeaten in two with a best of 160*.[239] India won the ODI series 5–1, Kohli becoming the first Indian captain to win an ODI series in South Africa.[240]

In March 2018, Kohli decided to play county cricket in England in June, in order to improve his batting before the start of India's tour to England the following month.[241][242] He signed to play for Surrey, but a neck injury ruled him out of his stint in England before it even began.[243] On 2 August, Kohli scored his first Test century on English soil in the first test match of the series against England.[244] On 5 August, Kohli displaced Steve Smith to become the No. 1 ranked Test batsman in the ICC Test rankings. He also became the seventh Indian batsman and first since Sachin Tendulkar in June 2011 to achieve this feat.[245] In the third test at Trent Bridge, Nottingham, Kohli scored 97 and 103, and helped India win by 203 runs.[246] At the end of 5-match test series, Kohli scored 593 runs, which was third highest runs by a Indian batsman in a losing test series.

During ODI series against West Indies in 2018, Kohli became the 12th batsman and fastest player to score 10,000 ODI runs.[247] He surpassed the milestone with 205 innings which is 54 innings less than the next quickest to the landmark, Sachin Tendulkar.[248] In the course he scored his 37th ODI century. Kohli's average after crossing 10,000 is 59.62, which is also the best average among the 10,000 club members.[249] On 27 October, after scoring his 38th ODI century, Kohli became the first batsman for India, first captain and tenth overall, to score three successive centuries in ODIs.[250] He ended up scoring 453 runs in 5 innings, at an average of 151.00, in the 5-match series and was the Player of the Series.[251]

Indian Premier League
In March 2008, Kohli was bought on a youth contract by the Indian Premier League franchise Royal Challengers Bangalore for $30,000. He had an indifferent 2008 season, with a total of 165 runs in 12 innings at an average of 15.00 and a strike rate of 105.09.[252] He fared slightly better in the second season in which he made a total of 246 runs at 22.36, striking at over 112, while his team made it as far as the final.[253] In the 2010 season, Kohli was the third highest run-getter for his team with 307 runs, averaging 27.90 and improving his strike rate to 144.81.[254]

Ahead of the 2011 season, Kohli was the only player retained by the Royal Challengers franchise. Kohli was made vice-captain of the team that year and also captained the team in a few matches when the regular skipper Daniel Vettori was injured. The Royal Challengers coach Ray Jennings opined that the 22-year-old would become the future captain of not only the franchise but also the Indian team.[255] Kohli was the second-highest run-getter of the season, only behind teammate Chris Gayle, and his team finished as runners-up of the IPL. Kohli accumulated a total of 557 runs at an average of 46.41 and a strike rate of over 121 including four fifties.[256] In the 2012 IPL, he was moderately successful, averaging 28 for his 364 runs.[257]


Kohli at the 2015 IPL opening ceremony.
After Vettori's retirement, Kohli was appointed as the team's captain for the 2013 season. The Royal Challengers finished fifth on the league table that year, but Kohli found success with the bat. Averaging 45.28, he hit a total of 634 runs at a strike rate of over 138 including six fifties and a top-score of 99 and finished as the season's third-highest run-scorer.[258] Bangalore finished seventh in the next season in which Kohli made 359 runs at 27.61.[259] He found success with the bat in the 2015 IPL in which he led his team to the playoffs. He finished fifth on the season's leading run-getters list with 505 runs at an average of 45.90 and a strike rate of more than 130.[260]

At the 2016 IPL, the Royal Challengers finished runners-up and Kohli broke the record for most runs in an IPL season (of 733 runs) by scoring 973 runs in 16 matches at an average of 81.08, winning the Orange Cap. He scored four centuries in the tournament, having never scored one in the Twenty20 format before the start of the season, and also became the first player to reach the 4000-run milestone in the IPL. At the launch event of his biography, 'Driven: The Virat Kohli Story' in New Delhi, in October 2016, Kohli announced that RCB would be the IPL franchise that he would permanently play for.[261]

Kohli missed the start of the 2017 season due to a shoulder injury. Morever, RCB finished the tournament at the bottom of the table, with Kohli scoring the most runs for his team, with 308 from 10 matches.

In the 2018 season, Kohli was retained by RCB for a price of ?17 crore, the highest for any player that year.

Playing style

Kohli playing the flick shot during the 2015 World Cup.
Kohli is a naturally aggressive batsman[38] with strong technical skills.[262] He usually bats in the middle-order, but, on many occasions, has opened the innings as well. He bats with a slightly open-chested stance[263][264] and a strong bottom-hand grip,[265][266] and is said to have quick footwork.[267] He is known for his wide range of shots, ability to pace an innings and batting under pressure.[268][269][270] He is strong through the mid-wicket and cover region.[271] He has said that the cover drive is his favourite shot, while also saying that the flick shot comes naturally to him.[20] He does not play the sweep shot often, being called "not a natural sweeper of the cricket ball".[272] His teammates have praised his confidence, commitment, focus and work ethics.[273][274][275] Kohli is also known to be a "sharp" fielder.[276][277]

"He is a consummate surgeon at the crease, intensely focused, working hard, playing the ball into gaps in the field and staying calm under pressure. He is always judging the right time to consolidate and the right time to seize a game by the scruff of the neck."
— Former South Africa captain AB de Villiers on Kohli.[278]
Kohli is regarded as the best limited-overs batsmen in the world, especially while chasing.[279][280] In ODIs, he averages around 69 in matches batting second as opposed to around 49 batting first.[281] 23 of his 38 ODI hundreds have come in run-chases and he holds the record for most hundreds batting second.[282] Regarding his impressive record batting second, Kohli has said "I love the whole situation that comes with chasing. I like the challenge of testing myself, figuring out how to rotate strike, when to hit a boundary."[20]

Kohli is often compared to Sachin Tendulkar, due to their similar styles of batting, and sometimes referred to as Tendulkar's "successor".[160][169] Many former cricketers expect Kohli to break Tendulkar's batting records.[283][284] Kohli has stated that growing up his idol and role model was Tendulkar and that as a kid he "tried to copy the shots [Tendulkar] played and hit sixes the way he used to hit them."[285] Former West Indies great Vivian Richards, who is regarded as the most destructive batsman in cricket, stated that Kohli reminds him of himself.[145] In early 2015, Richards said Kohli was "already legendary" in the ODI format,[286] while former Australian cricketer Dean Jones called Kohli the "new king of world cricket".[287]

Kohli is noted for his on-field aggression and was described in the media as "brash" and "arrogant" during his early career.[275][288] He has got into confrontations with players and umpires on several occasions.[275][289] While many former cricketers have backed his aggressive attitude,[290][291][292] some have criticised it.[275][293] In 2012, Kohli had stated that he tries to limit his aggressive behaviour but "the build-up and the pressure or the special occasions make it tough to control the aggression."[294]

In September 2018, West Indies legend Brian Lara, who was in New York as a part of the ICC Cricket World Cup 2019 Trophy Tour, picked Kohli as one of the best batsmen in the world, alongside England captain Joe Root.[295]

International centuries
Main article: List of international cricket centuries by Virat Kohli
As of October 2018, Kohli has scored 24 Test and 38 ODI centuries which makes him the second most successful centurion in ODI cricket after Sachin Tendulkar.[296]

Records and achievements
Fastest century
Fastest century by an Indian cricketer in ODIs (52 balls).[157]
Milestones
Fastest Indian to reach 1,000 runs in ODIs.[297]
Fastest Indian and third fastest in the world to reach 5,000 runs in ODIs.[298]
Fastest Indian and second fastest in the world to reach 6,000 runs in ODIs.[299]
Fastest Indian and second fastest in the world to reach 7,000 runs in ODIs.[300]
Fastest player in the world to reach 8,000 runs in ODIs.[301]
Fastest player in the world to reach 9,000 runs in ODIs.[302]
Fastest player in the world to reach 10,000 runs in ODIs.[303]
Fastest Indian and second fastest in the world to reach 10 centuries in ODIs.[304]
Fastest Indian and second fastest in the world to reach 15 centuries in ODIs.[305]
Fastest Indian and second fastest in the world to reach 20 centuries in ODIs.[306]
Fastest Indian and second fastest in the world to reach 25 centuries in ODIs.[307]
Fastest in the world to reach 30 centuries in ODIs.[308]
Fastest in the world to reach 35 centuries in ODIs.[309]
Second fastest in the world to reach 1,000 runs in T20Is.[209]
Fastest in the world to reach 15,000 international runs.[310]
Joint fastest batsman with Hashim Amla to reach 50 centuries across all forms of international cricket (348 innings).[311]
Only batsman in history to average more than 50 in Tests, ODIs and T20Is simultaneously; also possesses the highest combined average across all formats among Test players who have played in at least two formats.[312]
Highest historic rating points in the ICC rankings by an Indian batsman in Tests (937 points), ODIs (911 points) and T20Is (897 points) – achieved on 23 August 2018, 16 February 2018 and 7 September 2014 respectively.[313][314]
Fastest batsman, in terms of innings, to score 17,000 runs in international cricket (363).[315]
Crossed 900 ratings points in the ICC rankings in both Tests and ODIs – one amongst five batsmen to have done so and only the second batsman after AB de Villiers to do it simultaneously.[316]
First batsman to score 500 runs in a bilateral ODI series.[317]
Fastest in the world to score 2,000 runs in terms of innings in T20Is (56).[318]
First Indian cricketer to score three successive centuries in ODIs.[319]
Most runs in a calendar year/series
Most ODI runs in 2010 by an Indian cricketer.[84]
Most ODI runs in 2011 by any cricketer.[109]
Most ODI runs in 2012 by an Indian cricketer.[320]
Most ODI runs in 2013 by an Indian cricketer.[321]
Most ODI runs in 2014 by an Indian cricketer.[322]
Most ODI runs in 2016 by an Indian cricketer.[323]
Most Test runs in 2012 by an Indian cricketer.[324]
Most Test runs in 2015 by an Indian cricketer.[325]
Most Test runs in 2016 by an Indian cricketer.[326]
Most combined international runs scored in a year by an Indian cricketer – 2818 international runs in 2017.[327]
Most runs scored by an Indian cricketer in a three-match Test series – 610 runs against Sri Lanka in 2017.[327]
Most ODI runs in 2017 by any cricketer.[328]
Most runs in a bilateral ODI series by any cricketer – 558 runs against South Africa in 2018.[329]

Captaincy records
Most consecutive wins in Test series (9) as a captain from 2015–2017 (equal with Ricky Ponting from 2005–2008).[330]
First batsman to score three centuries in his first three innings as Test captain. He is also the second Test captain to score centuries in his first two Test innings after Greg Chappell.[203]
First Indian Test captain to score a double century overseas.[331]
First Indian Test captain to score two or more double centuries.[332]
Fastest captain to score 1000 ODI runs.[333]
First ever batsman to score double centuries in four consecutive Test series.[334]
Fastest captain to score 2000 ODI runs.[335]
First Indian captain to score a hundred and a duck in the same Test.[336]
First captain to score 10 international hundreds in a calendar year.[337]
Most Test centuries as a captain of India (12).[338]
Most double centuries by a captain in Tests (6).[339]
Most centuries (11) by a captain in a calendar year (2017).[337][327]
Most runs as captain of India in Tests.[340]
Most ODI centuries as a captain of India (13).[341]
First Test captain to score centuries in each game of a three-match Test series.[342]
Fastest captain to score 3000 ODI runs.[343]
First captain to score three successive centuries in ODIs.[344][345]
Awards
Sir Garfield Sobers Trophy (ICC Cricketer of the Year): 2017[346]
ICC ODI Player of the Year: 2012,[347] 2017[348]
ICC ODI Team of the Year: 2012, 2014, 2016 (captain), 2017 (captain)[349]
ICC Test Team of the Year: 2017 (captain)[350]
Polly Umrigar Award for International Cricketer of the Year: 2011–12, 2014–15, 2015–16, 2016–17, 2017–18
Padma Shri: 2017[12]
Arjuna Award: 2013[351]
Wisden Leading Cricketer in the World: 2016, 2017[11]
CEAT International Cricketer of the Year: 2011–12, 2013–14[352]
Barmy Army - International Player of Year: 2017, 2018[353]
Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna: 2018[354]
Outside cricket
Personal life

Kohli and Anushka Sharma at Vogue Awards.
Kohli started dating Bollywood actress Anushka Sharma in 2013; the couple soon earned the celebrity couple nickname "Virushka".[355][356] Their relationship attracted substantial media attention, with persistent rumours and speculations in the media, as neither of the two publicly talked about it.[357] The couple married on 11 December 2017 in a private ceremony in Florence, Italy.[358][359]

Kohli has admitted that he is superstitious. He used to wear black wristbands as a cricket superstition; earlier, he used to wear the same pair of gloves with which he had "been scoring". Apart from a religious black thread, he has also been wearing a kara on his right arm since 2012.[360]

Commercial investments
According to Kohli, football is his second favourite sport.[361] In 2014, Kohli became a co-owner of Indian Super League club FC Goa. He stated that he invested in the club with the "keenness of football" and because he "wanted football to grow in India".[362] He added, "It's a business venture for me for the future. Cricket's not going to last forever and I'm keeping all my options open after retirement."[361]

In September 2015, Kohli became a co-owner of the International Premier Tennis League franchise UAE Royals,[363] and, in December that year, became a co-owner of the JSW-owned Bengaluru Yodhas franchise in Pro Wrestling League.[364]

In November 2014, Kohli and Anjana Reddy's Universal Sportsbiz (USPL) launched a youth fashion brand WROGN. The brand started to produce men's casual wear clothing in 2015 and has tied up with Myntra and Shopper's Stop.[365] In late 2014, Kohli was announced as a shareholder and brand ambassador of the social networking venture 'Sport Convo' based in London.

In 2015, Kohli invested ?90 crore (US$13 million) to start a chain of gyms and fitness centres across the country. Launched under the name Chisel, the chain of gyms is jointly owned by Kohli, Chisel India and CSE (Cornerstone Sport and Entertainment), the agency which manages Kohli's commercial interests.[366] In 2016, Kohli started Stepathlon Kids, a children fitness venture, in partnership with Stepathlon Lifestyle.[367]

Endorsements
Kohli was signed up by sports agent Bunty Sajdeh of Cornerstone Sport and Entertainment after the 2008 Under-19 World Cup. Sajdeh recalls, "I didn’t go after them after they became stars. In fact, I watched Virat at the 2008 ICC Under-19 World Cup in Kuala Lumpur. I was mighty impressed with his attitude and the way he was marshalling his team. He had that spark. And I told Yuvi to set up the meeting."[368] Sajdeh manages Kohli's endorsement deals, along with those of other Indian cricketers Shikhar Dhawan, Rohit Sharma and Murali Vijay. It was reported in 2013 that Kohli's brand endorsements were worth over ?100 crore.[369] His bat deal with MRF is said to be the costliest deal in Indian cricket history.[368] In 2017, he signed an eight-year endorsement deal with Puma worth about ?110 crore, becoming the first Indian sportsperson to sign a ?100 crore deal with a brand.[370]

In 2014, American Appraisal estimated Kohli's brand value at US$56.4 million placing him fourth on the list of India's most valued celebrity brands.[371] The same year, UK-based magazine SportsPro rated Kohli as the second most marketable athlete in the world behind only Lewis Hamilton, placing him above the likes of Cristiano Ronaldo, Lionel Messi and Usain Bolt.[372] In an October 2016 report by Duff & Phelps on India's most valued celebrity brands, Kohli's brand value was estimated to be US$92 million, second only to that of Bollywood actor Shah Rukh Khan.[373]

In 2017, Kohli was ranked 7th in the list released by Forbes as the Most Valuable Brand among athletes ahead of players like Lionel Messi, Rory McIlroy and Stephen Curry with an estimated brand value of $14.5 million.[374] In 2018, Kohli was again listed 83 in the Top 100 highest paid athletes in the world.

As of September 2017, Kohli has endorsement deals with 17 brands.[375] Among the brands he endorsed in early 2018 are American Tourister, Audi, Boost, Colgate-Palmolive, Gillette, Gionee, Herbalife, MRF, Manyavar, New Era, Puma, Punjab National Bank, Tissot, Uber and Vicks.[376][377] The brands Kohli previously endorsed include 3C Company, Celkon Mobiles, Cinthol (from Godrej), Clear (from Unilever), Fair & Lovely, Fastrack (from Titan), Pepsi, Flying Machine, Mattel, Munch (from Nestle), Oakley, Red Chief Shoes, Royal Challenge (from United Breweries), Sangam Suitings and Toyota Motors.[378][379][380]

Charity

Kohli at a VKF charity event in June 2016.
In March 2013, Kohli started a charity foundation called Virat Kohli Foundation (VKF). The organisation aims at helping underprivileged kids and conducts events to raise funds for the charity.[381] According to Kohli, the foundation works with select NGOs to "create awareness, seek support and raise funds for the various causes they endorse and the philanthropic work they engage in."[382] In May 2014, eBay and Save the Children India conducted a charity auction with VKF, with its proceeds benefiting the education and healthcare of underprivileged children.[383]

Kohli has captained the All Heart Football Club, owned by VKF, in charity football matches against All Stars Football Club, owned by Abhishek Bachchan's Playing for Humanity. The matches, known as "Celebrity Clasico", feature cricketers playing for All Heart and Bollywood actors in the All Stars team, and are organized to generate funds for the two charity foundations.[384]


Controversies
In November 2018, Virat Kohli was criticised during the launch of his own mobile app,[385][386] when he suggested a fan should leave India if he liked foreign teams/players.[387][388] Many, including Harsha Bhogle and actor Siddharth, criticised Kohli for his statement.[389][390] Kohli responded to the criticism, saying that he will stick to getting trolled instead of trolling fans, and clarified that he made the statement in the context of how "these Indians" was mentioned in the fan's comment.[391]

Shakib Al Hasan to Samuels, no run, pitched up on off, blocked to point
22.5
1
Shakib Al Hasan to Hope, 1 run, full, leans into a drive towards deep cover
22.4
0
Shakib Al Hasan to Hope, no run, sliding into middle, drilled back
22.3
0
Shakib Al Hasan to Hope, no run,
22.2
0
Shakib Al Hasan to Hope, no run, full, sliding in, clipped to square leg
22.1
0
Shakib Al Hasan to Hope, no run, full on middle, defended
Mashrafe Mortaza to Samuels, no run, slower full ball on middle, defended
21.5
0
Mashrafe Mortaza to Samuels, no run, good length on off, punched to extra cover
21.4
0
Mashrafe Mortaza to Samuels, no run, back of a length outside off, punched to mid-off
21.3
0
Mashrafe Mortaza to Samuels, no run, short of length outside off, gets behind the line and defends
21.2
0
Mashrafe Mortaza to Samuels, no run, cuts in from a back of a length, tucked to midwicket
21.1
1
Mashrafe Mortaza to Hope, 1 run,
Mashrafe Mortaza to Samuels, no run, short of a length around off, punched to extra cover off the backfoot
17.5
6
Mashrafe Mortaza to Samuels, SIX runs, short, angling in, swivels and pulls over square leg
17.5
1nb
Mashrafe Mortaza to Samuels, 1 no ball, slower length ball, gets forward and pushes into the off side. He has overstepped
17.4
0
Mashrafe Mortaza to Samuels, no run, short of a length on off, defended
17.3
0
Mashrafe Mortaza to Samuels, no run, back of a length, angled into middle, tucked to midwicket
17.2
0
Mashrafe Mortaza to Samuels, no run, back of a length, angling in, stays back and defends
Samin : "So many jinx takes place here, I'll put a one on: Bangladesh will lose today. (Bravo just got out as I wrote it. Espncricinfo is amazing!!)"

17.1
1
Mashrafe Mortaza to Hope, 1 run, full outside off, leans into a drive to sweeper cover
END OF OVER:17 | 2 Runs 1 Wkt | WI: 70/2 (186 runs required from 33 overs, RR: 4.11, RRR: 5.63)
MN Samuels
0 (2b)
SD Hope
38 (51b)
Rubel Hossain
1-0-2-1
Mahmudullah
1-0-6-0
16.6
0
Rubel Hossain to Samuels, no run, short of length outside off, shuffles across and keeps it out
16.5
0
Rubel Hossain to Samuels, no run, full outside off, defended into the off side
16.4
W
Rubel Hossain to Bravo, OUT, bowled around the legs. Back of a length, keeps a little low, he tries to tuck it around off the pads but the ball skips through and clatters into the stumps
DM Bravo b Rubel Hossain 27 (43b 1x4 1x6) SR: 62.79

16.3
0
Rubel Hossain to Bravo, no run, back of a length, slanted across, punched to extra cover
16.2
2
Rubel Hossain to Bravo, 2 runs, short of a length, tucked to square leg
16.1
0
Rubel Hossain to Bravo, no run, back of a length, lots of width, slapped straight to point
END OF OVER:16 | 6 Runs | WI: 68/1 (188 runs required from 34 overs, RR: 4.25, RRR: 5.52)
SD Hope
38 (51b)
DM Bravo
25 (39b)
Mahmudullah
1-0-6-0
Mashrafe Mortaza
2-0-17-0
15.6
0
Mahmudullah to Hope, no run, flat and full on middle, defended back
15.5
1
Mahmudullah to Bravo, 1 run, pushed into the covers for a quick one
15.4
0
Mahmudullah to Bravo, no run, pitched up outside off, driven to cover
Stiaan: "i wish Bravo could take a page out of his brother's book, and bat a bit faster. the issue here (slow batting) is it creates a huge load of pressure on the batsmen who still needs to bat later on.. come on Bravo, put some effort into it and slog a few!!"

15.3
1
Mahmudullah to Hope, 1 run, full on middle and off, driven down to long-on
15.2
4
Mahmudullah to Hope, FOUR runs, looped around middle, but shortish and enough room to shift back and slash it away through the covers
Mahmudullah

James: "Kutbuddin, nice jinxing!"

15.1
0
Mahmudullah to Hope, no run,
END OF OVER:15 | 13 Runs | WI: 62/1 (194 runs required from 35 overs, RR: 4.13, RRR: 5.54)
DM Bravo
24 (37b)
SD Hope
33 (47b)
Mashrafe Mortaza
2-0-17-0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz
7-0-22-1
14.6
0
Mashrafe Mortaza to Bravo, no run, good length, angled into middle and leg, drilled towards mid-on
14.5
6
Mashrafe Mortaza to Bravo, SIX runs, full, angled into middle, heaved over deep midwicket. Powerful wrists
14.4
0
Mashrafe Mortaza to Bravo, no run, defended down the pitch
14.3
1
Mashrafe Mortaza to Hope, 1 run,
14.2
6
Mashrafe Mortaza to Hope, SIX runs, just back of a length, advances down the ground and mows it over to the right of sightscreen after giving himself room
Kutbuddin: "of the 5 Bangladesh players playing 100 matches together, 4 batsmen did well. Something special awaited from Mortaza now."

14.1
0
Mashrafe Mortaza to Hope, no run, short of length outside off, punched to point
END OF OVER:14 | 2 Runs | WI: 49/1 (207 runs required from 36 overs, RR: 3.50, RRR: 5.75)
SD Hope
26 (44b)
DM Bravo
18 (34b)
Mehidy Hasan Miraz
7-0-22-1
Mashrafe Mortaza
1-0-4-0
13.6
1
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Hope, 1 run, flat length ball, punched down to long-on
13.5
1
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Bravo, 1 run, backfoot punch through cover
13.4
0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Bravo, no run, fuller of a length, spinning away, defended
13.3
0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Bravo, no run, short of length outside off, punched down to mid-off
13.2
0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Bravo, no run, tries to nudge it away and finds short fine
13.1
0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Bravo, no run, sliding length ball on leg, defended
END OF OVER:13 | 4 Runs | WI: 47/1 (209 runs required from 37 overs, RR: 3.61, RRR: 5.64)
SD Hope
25 (43b)
DM Bravo
17 (29b)
Mashrafe Mortaza
1-0-4-0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz
6-0-20-1
12.6
0
Mashrafe Mortaza to Hope, no run, short of a length, defended around off
12.5
1
Mashrafe Mortaza to Bravo, 1 run, fuller of a length, angling into leg, pushed down to mid-on
12.4
1
Mashrafe Mortaza to Hope, 1 run, good length outside off, flayed over the in-field at cover
12.3
0
Mashrafe Mortaza to Hope, no run, back of a length, pushes back and drops to point
12.2
1
Mashrafe Mortaza to Bravo, 1 run,
12.1
1
Mashrafe Mortaza to Hope, 1 run, short of a length on middle and leg, punched to long-on
END OF OVER:12 | 3 Runs | WI: 43/1 (213 runs required from 38 overs, RR: 3.58, RRR: 5.60)
DM Bravo
15 (27b)
SD Hope
23 (39b)
Mehidy Hasan Miraz
6-0-20-1
Mustafizur Rahman
2-0-12-0
11.6
0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Bravo, no run, full, sliding into middle, pushed back off the inside of the bat
11.5
1
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Hope, 1 run, slashes it away to sweeper cover
11.4
1
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Bravo, 1 run, slider, goes to midwicket off the inside of the bat
11.3
1
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Hope, 1 run,
11.2
0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Hope, no run, drills this back of a length ball back to the bowler
11.1
0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Hope, no run, length, spinning in, pushed to mid-on
END OF OVER:11 | 3 Runs | WI: 40/1 (216 runs required from 39 overs, RR: 3.63, RRR: 5.53)
SD Hope
21 (35b)
DM Bravo
14 (25b)
Mustafizur Rahman
2-0-12-0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz
5-0-17-1
10.6
1
Mustafizur Rahman to Hope, 1 run, short of good length outside off, punched to deep point
10.5
0
Mustafizur Rahman to Hope, no run, length ball, slanted across on middle, defended
10.4
1
Mustafizur Rahman to Bravo, 1 run, short of length outside off, punched to deep point
10.3
1
Mustafizur Rahman to Hope, 1 run, shortish on middle and leg, pulled off the hips to deep square
10.2
0
Mustafizur Rahman to Hope, no run, good length on middle, defended
10.1
0
Mustafizur Rahman to Hope, no run, short of good length, nips away and squares him up as it beats the outside edge
END OF OVER:10 | 5 Runs | WI: 37/1 (219 runs required from 40 overs, RR: 3.70, RRR: 5.47)
DM Bravo
13 (24b)
SD Hope
19 (30b)
Mehidy Hasan Miraz
5-0-17-1
Mustafizur Rahman
1-0-9-0
Akshay to take you through now

9.6
0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Bravo, no run, fuller ball, Bravo drives it gently into the off side
9.5
0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Bravo, no run, quicker one, drags it short. Bravo defends from the crease
9.4
0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Bravo, no run, fuller angling into the batsman, defended into the off side
9.3
1
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Hope, 1 run, fuller length on the pads, tapped back to the bowler's right. He dives and mis-fields, padding the ball away, that allows a single
9.2
0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Hope, no run, length ball, he goes back in his crease to whip it to mid-on
9.1
4
Mehidy Hasan Miraz to Hope, FOUR runs, sweeps it with the turn and nails it nicely, sending to deep square leg for a boundary
rana1171: "it might sound silly, but what if bangladesh start with spinners in wc too! none seems expecting it. could be a good tactic considering bd strength."

END OF OVER:9 | 9 Runs | WI: 32/1 (224 runs required from 41 overs, RR: 3.55, RRR: 5.46)
SD Hope
14 (27b)
DM Bravo
13 (21b)
Mustafizur Rahman
1-0-9-0
Mehidy Hasan Miraz
4-0-12-1
8.6
1
Mustafizur Rahman to Hope, 1 run, attempted yorker, dug out to mid-off for a single
8.5
0
Mustafizur Rahman to Hope, no run, back of a length, patted back to the bowler
8.4
6
Mustafizur Rahman to Hope, SIX runs, over the top and all the way stunning shot, slightly back of a length, he comes on the front foot and hits it on the up from outside off. Carries all the way over wide long-off
8.3
0
Mustafizur Rahman to Hope, no run, angled across him again, he defends outside off
8.2
0
Mustafizur Rahman to Hope, no run, back of a length, angled across, he stood tall and punched it, but Mehidy at point dived to his right to prevent a possible boundary
8.1
1
Mustafizur Rahman to Bravo, 1 run, strays on the pads again and is picked off to fine leg
Good decision by Mortaza to not review the previous over. That was turning past leg stump by Mehidy.

8.1
1w
Mustafizur Rahman to Bravo, 1 wide, starts off with a loosener down leg, which will be a wide
Pace now, here's the Fizz
